3D PRINTED ELECTRIC MOTORS AS A STEP TOWARDS SELF-REPLICATING
MACHINES
Virtual Conference 19–23 October 2020
Abdurrazag Elaskri1, Alex Ellery2
1

Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Canada, E-mail: Abdurrazagelaskri@cmail.caerleton.ca
2
Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Canada, E-mail: alexellery@cunet.carleton.ca

ABSTRACT
This research addresses the application of 3D printing
technologies in innovative electrical machinery. To
date, there is a lack of fabricated devices with electromechanical functionality for parts entirely manufactured using only Additive Manufacturing (AM)
technologies. This study provides a new and different
approach to create a fully 3D printed electric motors,
with a focus on an additively manufactured iron core,
winding, insulation, and permanent magnet. We investigate how to develop 3D printed motor with multi-material and multi-technique without using embedding devices. Several prototypes of radial and axial
flux DC electric motors were fabricated and tested.
Their functionality indicated the potential of achieving 3D-printed motor using inexpensive, commercially available equipment. A good plan application is to
use the 3D printed motor as the core component of a
self-replicating machine. Suppose such a machine
was deployed on the Moon. It could be a robotic system that uses lunar materials to replicate itself and,
eventually, fabricate a broad range of future space
assets.
1

INTRODUCTION

Fabrication of functional objects utilizing AM is a
new research area, and the basic approach is to embed off-the-shelf devices on or in a printed object by
inserting conductive wires into the printed geometry
during the printing process. In recent studies, conductive inks were also used to form electronic circuits
into 3D printed parts [1]. As an example, in [2], the
writers describe the process in which the 3D printed
part was embedded with electrical components and
electronic circuits made of conductive ink. Regardless of the employment of AM technologies for producing a wide range of dielectric and metallic materials, previous studies about fabricating electromechanical devices are relatively limited. All attempts to 3Dprint electric motors only considered the main structure of the rotor and stator. The main challenge of
building electric motors with current manufacturing
systems is the limited available materials that can be
processed using 3D printing machines. For instance,

an electrical conductor is one of the essential elements in an electric motor. However, the lack of mature AM technologies able to produce a high electrical conductivity material such as copper is considered
as a challenge. A conventional DC motor is also constructed of permanent magnets (PMs), and the most
powerful PM's should have an organized granular
structure that is a challenge to rebuild with a 3D
printing machine. Furthermore, 3D printing the rotor
and stator cores with high permeability soft magnetic
materials that determine the motor performance are
still under development. Based on the above principles, the brushed DC electric motor (BDCM) is selected to be entirely 3D printed. This selection is resulting in the use of fewer components where the
electrical power source in a classical BDC motor is
connected to the rotor winding through a commutator
and brushes without the need for electronic commutation based on hall position sensors. Besides, all other
motor types are derived from its design. The selection
of the AM technique in this research revolved around
considering several issues, including the availability,
materials, costs, process of manufacturing, and the
state of the art of the AM technologies available. For
comparative purposes, the rotor core is produced
considering different types of additively manufactured material using Fused Deposition Modelling
(FDM) and Cold Spray Additive Manufacturing
(CSAM). Several prototypes of Self-excited DC motor were 3D printed in order to eliminate the use of
PMs in the stator using different materials and different printing techniques, followed by the building process of pancake motor in order to eliminate the use of
the copper coils. Optimization techniques are not
addressed in this research since the first goal is to 3D
print electric motor, not improve its performance.
Also, the building of the pancake motor was only to
develop the coils technique to eliminate the copper
coil winding.
3 RELEVANT PREVIOUS ATTEMPTS TO
3D PRINT INTERACTIVE OBJECTS
Fabrication of functional objects is a new research
area, and the standard approach is to embed off-theshelf devices inside the printed object. H. Peng et al.

[3] developed a custom print head with two-wire
feeders that can deliver the wire within five-degrees
of freedom 5DOF on an FDM printer. They used this
for winding copper wire coil to induce a magnetic
field and winding soft iron over a plastic structure to
form highly magnetic permeability poles. They
demonstrated this by fabricating a 6-pole motor stepper stator (i.e. a reluctance motor rotor). Savage et al.
[4] showed how 3D-printing could build interactive
objects by embedding a machine vision-based system
for sensing human input in physical controls, such as
joysticks, buttons and sliders. Hook et al. [5] embedded small three-axis wireless accelerometers in the
moving parts of a 3D-printed object to tracking
movement. Furthermore, RevoMaker [6] presented
the idea of inserting premade circuits inside a folded
cuboid, then printing over its facets representing
computer muse. Savage et al. [7] also developed
placing scanning marks and stickers on a solid model
surface composed of sculpting materials, allowing
them to be converted into 3D-printed geometry. They
then mounted electronics and sensors inside the 3Dprinted item. Other researchers have created interactive objects by adding off-the-shelf sensors and actuator parts during the printing process, including
3D-printed light pipes [8], interactive speakers [9],
pneumatic device controls [10], hydraulically actuated robotic structures [11] and capacitive touch sensors for interactive objects [12]. Voxel8 [13] developed an FDM printer that can print with both thermoplastic and conductive silver paste. In addition to
embedding off-the-shelf electronic components such
as motors, this made printing a complete quadcopter
possible, including the circuits. Researchers have
recently investigated different techniques to insert
conductive wires into 3D-printed geometry, thus producing 3D-printed interactive objects. Kim et al. [14]
demonstrated early results of embedding a copper
wire on an airflow duct built by FDM to demonstrate
multi-material 3D-printed electronics. Bayless et al.
[15] studied embedding wire by adding a wireprinting tool head to the RepRap 3D-printer to manufacture hybrid wire/plastic parts. Bas [16] tested
printing over a copper wire using a rotary ring to orient the laid wire and extruding filament to cover it, as
an example of single-layer wiring prints. Skylar-Scott
et al. [17] introduced a combination of direct ink
writing with a focused laser that anneals printed metallic features locally, to produce complex structures
such as helical springs at micro-scale. Finally, Christoph Laimer [18] built the 3D-printed rotor and stator
of a brushless DC electric motor with an ordinary
FDM printer, then embedded off-the-shelf magnets,
copper wire, an electronic speed control (ESC) and

ball-bearings. Fabrication of operative objects using
AM is a new research area. The fundamental way is
to embed off-the-shelf devices on or in a printed object, including conductive wires, into the printed geometry throughout the printing method. In recent
researches, conductive inks were such as silver ink,
also used to form electronic circuits into 3D printed
parts. Although the employment of AM technologies
for constructing a wide range of dielectric and metallic materials, previous studies about fabricating electromechanical devices are comparatively limited. All
efforts to 3D-print electric motors only considered
the main structure of the rotor and stator. The little
experimentation on the capabilities of AM on the
development of products with mixed materials and
different technologies, such as circuit boards and
electric motors, shows a gap in the literature. This
study presents a new approach to creating a fully 3D
printed electric motors, including all motor parts such
as the rotor core with the field winding, the stator
core with stator winding or permanent magnets, insulation and the outer frame. We examine how to develop electric motor with multi-material and multitechnique to attain a 3D printed motor that can build
without embedding devices.
3 FABRICATING AND TESTING OF RADIAL-FLUX DC MOTOR
An electric motor is consisting of a stator and a rotor,
separated by an air gap. The stator is stationary and
holds the PMs, while the rotor is the rotating section
and carries the windings. The rotor is usually produced of silicon steel, presented in thin lamination
sheets, and cut by laser to shape the desired patterns.
These sheets are attached to form the final shape of
the rotor cores [19]. In this study, the brushed DC
motor was chosen to be studied and 3D-printed. This
selection was based on the simplicity of this type of
motors, where the electric power source in a classical
BDC motor is connected to the rotor winding through
a commutator and brushes, and therefore no need for
electronic commutation based on hall position sensors [19]. Different methodologies were used in this
study to achieve a fully 3D-printed motor are discussed in the following sections. We have evolved
furthest in 3D printing electric motors and have
printed and tested all components except for the copper coil windings and stator hard magnets[20][21].
The building process is performed according to the
following sections.

3.1 Stator Core Made of Maraging Steel (MS1)
In this prototype, the PMs were replaced by field coil
wound on two steel 3D-printed pole shoes, as shown
in Fig. 1.

Table 1: Comparison between the 3D printed pole
and the soft iron pole
Maraging
Steel

Soft Iron
Stator

EMF
(Gauss)

EMF
(Gauss)

18V

3.1

41

0.5

18V

1.2

23

1

18V

1.1

14

1.5

18V

1

8

Distance
(cm)

Input DC
Voltage

0

3.2 Stator Core Made of Magnetic Iron PLA

Figure 1: Self-excited DC motor (The 3D printed
pole shoes made of steel)
The two-pole shoes were built using EOS Maraging
Steel MS1 powder on an EOS M290 machine that
uses the Direct metal laser sintering (DMLS) technique. The 3D-printing of the pole shoes was done by
the ICAMP Innovation Center operated by Canadore
College in North Bay, Ontario [22]. The two-pole
shoes were wound with copper coil 26 MAG, and the
number of turns per pole was 350. The motor was
assembled with the same rotor built from Fe-3Si silicon steel particles and tested in the first approach
[20]. The results showed that the coil heated up after
a few seconds, and the produced EMF on the rotor
was very weak (1.2 Gauss/pole) when connected to
the 18V DC power supply. The weakness of the produced EMF is due to the low permeability of the 3Dprinted steel, and this demonstrated the need to consider other materials with higher permeability. The
EMF comparison between the 3D-printed steel stator
and the soft iron stator is shown in Tab [1].

In this prototype, the Maraging Steel stator was replaced by a magnetic iron PLA stator, as shown in
Fig. 2. The magnetic iron PLA from Proto-Pasta was
successfully tested in the rotor core. The 3D printed
pole-shoes were wound with copper coil 30 MAG,
and the number of turns for each pole was 900. The
testing was done using the same rotors that were built
and tested previously. The results showed that the
EMF of the stator was increased slightly compared to
the 3D-printed steel prototype (1.6 Gauss/pole vs 1.2
respectively) when connected to the same 18V DC
power. However, this is far too weak to generate a
stator field than the persistent magnetic fields produced by the rare earth magnet stator (51
Gauss/magnet).

Figure 2: Open Geometry Self-excited DC Motor
(Pole Shoes Made of Magnetic Iron PLA).
This problem is due to the magnetic iron PLA not
having the features of radially magnetized fast demagnetization like silicon steel or soft iron. Even
though testing of magnetic iron PLA showed an increase in the intensity of a concentrated field slightly

more than standard polylactic acid (PLA). In order to
amplify the electromagnet field on the stator, the
open geometry stator was replaced by closed geometry. This design has a hollow cylindrical shape in
which the poles are fixed and made of magnetic iron
PLA, as shown in Fig. 3.

Pancake motor was only chosen to develop the coils
technique to eliminate the copper coil winding on the
rotor motor; hence axial-flux (pancake) motors that
can have more than one rotor were selected. The
structure of a Pancake DC brush motor is similar to a
conventional motor, apart from its shape and size.
Though pancake motors are more compact due to
their thin rotors, they also consist of a rotor, commutator, stator, PMs, and winding [19], [23], [24]. This
type was chosen to enable printing the winding on
both sides of the rotor disks. We investigated the possibility of eliminating the copper coil windings on the
motor rotor through a pancake motor [20],[21]. The
latter processes were performed according to the following steps.
4.1 Motor Rotor Made of Conductive Copper
Filament (Electrifi by Multi3D)

Figure 3: Closed Geometry Self-excited DC Motor
(Pole Shoes Made of Magnetic Iron PLA).
The idea is that using a closed geometry will provide
a low reluctance path for the magnetic flux. Both the
rotor and stator magnets were wire wound, and the
rotor winding was connected to the commutator
through wire brushes using 24 MAG copper wire,
which made the motor a series of wound self-excited
DC. The commutator was a simple set of four thin
contact copper sheets. The stator was wound with
100 turns per pole shoe. The main structure and
commutator core were 3D-printed from ABS filament. The only non-3D-printed parts were the copper
wire coils and the steel motor shaft. The motor was
connected to 18V DC power supply, and testing
showed that the attractive and resistive forces of the
two-pole shoes are strong enough to rotate the armature. Measurements showed that the EMF increased
to 12 Gauss/pole, which is approximately eight times
more intense than the open geometry and was enough
to run the motor successfully.
4 FABRICATING AND TESTING OF AXIALFLUX DC (PANCAKE) MOTOR: ROTOR
WINDING USING AM

To eliminate the use of copper winding or PCB on
the rotor motor. Another experiment was conducted
to investigate using conductive copper filament
(Electrifi by Multi3D), which is the only 3D-printing
filament on the market considered conductive; the
manufacturer states it has a resistivity of 0.006 Ω cm.
The challenge here was determining how to print two
materials with a single head printer. To accomplish
this, 3D-printing of the substrate was done first with
magnetic iron PLA filaments, then cooled, and the
printing bed was levelled according to the substrate,
rather than the bed. After repeatably attempting to
print traces using Electrifi, a print/no print issue was
encountered since the extruder system of the 3Dprinter (Anet A8) could not push the filament with
sufficient pressure due to its flexibility, and this led
to the nozzle becoming clogged. To deal with this, a
series of attempts were conducted until the printing
worked adequately. The issue was solved using the
following steps: (1) The tension from the lever and
the hobbed gear was too high to handle semi-flexible
filaments, as the gear teeth would bite too deeply into
the filament and scrape it off. The tension was reduced until the ideal pressure was determined. (2)
The print temperature for Electrifi is lower than most
other filaments (e.g. PLA, ABS), which meant the
previous residual filament would cause clogging very
quickly if the nozzle was not well cleaned. A spare,
clean nozzle was kept on hand to address this problem. (3) Lowering the print speed to 15 mm/s was
ideal for a 0.5 mm standard brass nozzle. (4) The
distance between the nozzle tip and the print bed
must be greater than 0.2 mm to ensure the printed
first layer is not overly compressed. It was determined that the perfect printer setup when using this
type of filament is shown in Tab 2.

Table 2: Perfect printer setup for Electrifi filament.
Nozzle type

Standard brass

Nozzle diameter

0.4 mm

Extruder temperature

150-degrees Celsius

Bed temperature

Room temperature

Layer thickness

0.2 mm

Print speed

15 mm/s

Layer height

0.2 mm

Print bed

Blue tape

Initial layer height

0.2 mm

After successful trace printing on a printed rotor, as
shown in Fig. 4, the motor was connected to a low
voltage DC power supply to test the conductivity and
electromagnetic field. An incremental voltage increases to 3.4 V resulted in very high contact resistance between the probes and traces, and the hot
spots heated up when the resistance reached 17 Ω at
200 mA. This verifies that the filament cannot build
our electric motors and is suitable only for low current applications. The conclusion for the copper conductive filament is that it cannot be used for high
power applications.

(now Cubic technologies). During the LOM process,
layers of copper or paper are fused/laminated together using heat and pressure, then cut into the required
configuration with a computer-controlled blade or
laser [25]. Though this machine is not available at
Carleton University, the same idea can be implemented using simple tools. The Circuit Explore Air 2
machine shown in Fig. 5 was tailored to perform the
LOM process. The winding traces are drawn on the
machine software, and after feeding the copper tape
to the machine, it cuts the copper into the required
shape, and the unwanted material can then be easily
removed. The copper winding traces can then be
taped onto the 3D-printed rotor.

Figure 5: Circuit Explore Air 2 machine.
Accordingly, the new prototype was fabricated in the
previously mentioned idea. The rotor and the commutator were designed to be attached as one piece.
Both rotor and commutator were 3D printed using
magnetic iron PLA. The rotor diameter was 150 mm
with a thickness of 2mm, and the commutator diameter was 25 mm. The Circuit Explore Air 2 machine
was used to cut the shape of the armature winding
and taped on both sides to create a double-sided rotor, as shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 4: Fully 3D printed armature made from the
conductive copper filament.
4.2 Motor Rotor Made Using Laminated Object
Manufacturing Like Technique (LOM)
After searching for an alternative to 3D-printing the
whole rotor, and to eliminate the use of copper winding or PC printed boards, a new prototype was constructed using the LOM technique, a 3D-printing
process developed by California-based Helisys Inc.

Figure 6: Copper Tape Winding Traces on 3D
Printed Rotor.

Four poles were created with nine windings per side,
so 18 turns in total. The width of the winding trace is
1 mm, the clearance between traces is approximately
1 mm, and the thickness of the copper foil is 0.0762
mm. The commutator was divided into four segments; each was attached to a copper conductor tape
and soldered by hand to the end of each winding coil.
The motor was assembled with a 3D-printed open
stator, as shown in Fig. 8, and the two rare-earth circular magnets were buried in the core of the inner
stator. When connected to 9V DC, the rotor produces
an electromagnetic field very similar to the previous
PCB constructed motor, and the magnetic flux magnitude allows the motor to run successfully. Thus, it
has now been demonstrated that copper wire can be
replaced by a 3D-printed pattern.

Figure 8: 3D printed parts of DC Motor.
Using the Anet A8 3D-printer, all parts were made of
magnetic iron PLA, except the motor base made of
regular PLA. Four 3D-printed PMs were built from
NdFeB by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory [26],
as shown in Fig. 9. These were buried in the inner
stator core.

Figure 7: 3D Printed Pancake Motor.
5 RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTATION: THE
MANUFACTURING PROCESSES OF THE
FULLY 3D PRINTED RADIAL-FLUX DC MOTOR
As discussed, the FDM and LOM techniques were
applied to build the 3D-printed pancake motor. This
prototype focuses on using the same techniques to
complete a traditional electric motor that was partially 3D-printed in section 3 since the traditional electric motor is the most fundamental design from which
all other motors are derived [21]. This approach will
3D-print all parts of the motor, including the PMs. It
is designed with an open geometry to provide easy
access to every part, and consists of the 3D-printed
motor base, the rotor core, stator brackets, commutator, axle, bearings, nuts, and bolts, as shown in Fig. 8.

Figure 9: 3D Printed Permanent Magnet.
Eight equally spaced slots were formed at the outer
circumference of the rotor core and used to wind the
copper foil tape. Four poles were wound with copper
tape (SPARKFUN #SF-PRT-11081) with a thickness
of 152 microns and an approximate width of 5mm,
with 17 turns per pole. The copper tape was insulated
using silicone modified conformal coating before it
was wound by hand, though it could also be fabricated with LOM. Four sets of the 152-micron thick contact copper sheets were attached to the commutator;
the conductive glue side of the copper foil made it
easy to attach the ends to the commutator copper
tapes without soldering. Both rotor core and commutator were attached to the printed axle, which was 60
mm long, with a diameter of 3.175 mm, as shown in
Fig. 10.

using inexpensive, commercially available equipment. Though manual intervention was used in these
samples to build the motors, the systems demonstrate
what we can do with a multi-material, multitechnology 3D-printer. A promising idea for the future application of such a machine is to facilitate
evolving a self-replicating machine, which is considered as a tool necessary for outer space exploration.
Suppose such a machine was deployed on the Moon,
for example. In that case, it could be a robotic system
that uses lunar materials to replicate itself and, ultimately, construct a wide range of future space assets,
thereby demonstrating that 3D-printing could lead to
significant and sustainable autonomous operations in
space exploration.
Figure 10: Rotor Assembly.
The rotor was assembled with the motor base and the
stator, and two copper wires of 20 GA were used to
form the brushes, as shown in Fig. 11. To test the
motor, it was attached to an 18V DC power source
connected to the rotor winding through the commutator and brushes. The two brushes contact the copper
conductor tapes to reverse the flow of current in the
rotor, resulting in a successful rotor movement.

References
[1] Ai. Gibson, D. W. Rosen, and Brent Stucker,
"Design for additive manufacturing," in Design for
additive manufacturing, Springer, 2010, pp. 299–
332.
[2] A. J. Lopes, A. Eric MacDonald, and R. B.
Wicker, "Integrating stereolithography and direct
print technologies for 3D structural electronics fabrication," Rapid Prototyp. J., 2012.
[3] Huaishu Peng, François Guimbretière, J.
McCann, and Scott Hudson, "A 3d printer for interactive electromagnetic devices," in Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2016, pp. 553–562.
[4] V. Savage, C. Chang, and B. Hartmann,
"Sauron: embedded single-camera sensing of printed physical user interfaces," in in Proceedings of the
26th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology, 2013, pp. 447–456.

Figure 11: Fully 3D printed Motor.
5

CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated a DC electric motor in which
only the wire coils are not 3D-printed. However, the
coils can be replaced by copper foil, which can be
3D-printed using the LOM technique. The Circuit
Explore Air 2 machine was used to form the shape of
the pancake motor armature winding, rather the LOM
machine; further investigation is recommended to
confirm this technique. All parts of the radial and
axial flux DC electric motors were fabricated with
3D-printing techniques, and the functionality indicated the potential of achieving a fully 3D-printed motor

[5] J. Hook, P. Wright, T. Nappey, P. Olivier, and S.
Hodges, "Making 3D printed objects interactive using wireless accelerometers," in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings,
2014.
[6] W. Gao, Y. Zhang, D. C. Nazzetta, K. Ramani,
and R. J. Cipra, "RevoMaker: Enabling multidirectional and functionally-embedded 3D printing
using a rotational cuboidal platform," in UIST 2015
- Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, 2015.
[7] V. Savage, S. Follmer, J. Li, and B. Hartmann,
"Makers? marks: Physical markup for designing and
fabricating functional objects," in UIST 2015 - Pro-

ceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology, 2015.
[8] K. D. D. Willis, E. Brockmeyer, S. E. Hudson,
and I. Poupyrev, "Printed Optics: 3D printing of
embedded optical elements for interactive devices,"
in UIST'12 - Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2012.
[9] Y. Ishiguro and I. Poupyrev, "3D printed interactive speakers," in Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2014.
[10] M. Vázquez, E. Brockmeyer, R. Desai, C. Harrison, and S. E. Hudson, "3D printing pneumatic
device controls with variable activation force capabilities," in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2015.
[11] R. Maccurdy, R. Katzschmann, Y. Kim, and D.
Rus, "Printable hydraulics: A method for fabricating
robots by 3D co-printing solids and liquids," in Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2016.
[12] M. Schmitz, M. Khalilbeigi, M. Balwierz, R.
Lissermann, M. Mühlhaüser, and J. Steimle, "Capricate: A fabrication pipeline to design and 3D
printcapacitive touch sensors for interactive objects," in UIST 2015 - Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology, 2015.
[13] M. Humphries. Voxel8 3d printer can print a
complete quadcopter. Available at:
https://www.geek.com/chips/voxel8-3d-printer-canprint-a-complete-quadcopter-including-theelectronics-1613166/
[14] C. Y. Kim, A. Cuaron, M. A. Perez, D. Espalin,
E. MacDonald, and R. B. Wicker, "Cooperative fabrication methodology for embedding wireon curved
surfaces," in 25th Annual International Solid
Freeform Fabrication Symposium &#65533; An
Additive Manufacturing Conference, SFF 2014,
2014.
[15] J. Bayless, M. Chen, and B. Dai, "Wire Embedding 3D Printer," 2010.
[16] B. de Bruijn. Additive wire-laying. Available
at: https://basdebruijn.com/2014/05/additive-wirelaying/

[17] M. A. Skylar-Scott, S. Gunasekaran, and J. A.
Lewis, "Laser-assisted direct ink writing of planar
and 3D metal architectures," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A., 2016.
[18] C. Laimer. 600 watt, halbach brushless motor.
Available at: http://www.laimer.ch/
[19] W. Tong, Mechanical Design of Electric Motors. 2014.
[20] A. Elaskri and A. Ellery, "Developing Techniques To 3D Print Electric Motors," Proc Int Symp
Artif. Intell. Robot. Autom. Sp., p. 5, 2018.
[21] A. Ellery and A. Elaskri, "Steps toward selfassembly of lunar structures from modules of 3Dprinted in-situ resources," Proc. Int. Astronaut.
Congr. IAC, vol. 2019-Octob, no. October, pp. 21–
25, 2019.
[22] CANADORE. Innovation Center for Advanced
Manufacturing and Production. Available at:
https://www.canadorecollege.ca/icamp.
[23] G. Gyani, B. Sc, and O. M. Parkash, "Design
and technological aspects of printed motor armature," no. I.
[24] L. Hsu, M.-C. Tsai, C. Wu, and M. Tsai, "Design of a Miniature Axial Flux Spindle Motor with
Rhomboidal PCB Winding.," INTERMAG 2006
Conf., vol. 3, no. 10, p. 310, 2006.
[25] E. Palermo. What is Laminated Object Manufacturing?. Available at:
https://www.livescience.com/40310-laminatedobject-manufacturing.html.
[26] I. Antoniac, D. Popescu, A. Zapciu, A. Antoniac, F. Miculescu, and H. Moldovan, "Magnesium
Filled Polylactic Acid (PLA) Material for Filament
Based 3D Printing," Materials (Basel)., vol. 12, p.
719, 2019.

