Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Affordable, rapid bootstrapping of space industry and solar
system civilization
Philip T. Metzger, Ph.D., A.M. ASCE1, Anthony Muscatello, Ph.D.2, Robert P. Mueller, A.M.
ASCE3, and James Mantovani, Ph.D.4
1

Physicist, Granular Mechanics and Regolith Operations Lab, NASA Kennedy Space Center,
Philip.T.Metzger@nasa.gov, NE-S-1, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899
2

Chemist, Applied Chemistry Lab, NASA Kennedy Space Center,
Anthony.C.Muscatello@nasa.gov, NE-S-2, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899
3

Aerospace Engineer, Surface Systems Office, NASA Kennedy Space Center,
Rob.Mueller@nasa.gov, NE-S, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899
4

Physicist, Granular Mechanics and Regolith Operations Lab, NASA Kennedy Space Center,
James.G.Mantovani@nasa.gov, NE-S-1, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899

Abstract:
Advances in robotics and additive manufacturing have become game-changing for the prospects
of space industry. It has become feasible to bootstrap a self-sustaining, self-expanding industry
at reasonably low cost. Simple modeling was developed to identify the main parameters of
successful bootstrapping. This indicates that bootstrapping can be achieved with as little as 12
metric tons (MT) landed on the Moon during a period of about 20 years. The equipment will be
teleoperated and then transitioned to full autonomy so the industry can spread to the asteroid
belt and beyond. The strategy begins with a sub-replicating system and evolves it toward full
self-sustainability (full closure) via an in situ technology spiral. The industry grows exponentially
due to the free real estate, energy, and material resources of space. The mass of industrial
assets at the end of bootstrapping will be 156 MT with 60 humanoid robots, or as high as 40,000
MT with as many as 100,000 humanoid robots if faster manufacturing is supported by launching
a total of 41 MT to the Moon. Within another few decades with no further investment, it can
have millions of times the industrial capacity of the United States. Modeling over wide
parameter ranges indicates this is reasonable, but further analysis is needed. This industry
promises to revolutionize the human condition.

Introduction
The solar system’s resources are the key to humanity’s future. Our civilization’s demand for
energy and material resources is rapidly growing toward the limits of the planet. There is
mounting evidence that we are beginning to feel those limits in some of the non-renewable
energy and mineral resources (Bentley 2002; de Almeida and Silva 2009; Lin and Liu 2010; Mudd
and Ward 2008), and that they cannot support our current rates of population growth with
industrialization for another century. Fortunately, the processes that formed our habitable
Earth also endowed the solar system with literally billions of times more resources than exist on
one planet alone (Hartmann 1985; Lewis and Lewis 1987; Lissauer 1993; Duke et al. 2006,
Mueller et al. 2010). The challenge is in finding a way to access those resources for the benefit
of humanity.
1

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
Until now this has not been economically feasible because of the vast distances and orbital
energies separating the bodies in our solar system with the high expense of spaceflight. Gerard
K. O’Neill (1989) estimated in the 1980’s that an orbiting space colony could become economic
only if it had a human population of greater than 10,000 to perform manufacturing tasks.
History has since proven that there was little chance of building a space colony if it had to be
that large to make a profit. Zubrin (1999) argued in the 1990’s that human-tended
manufacturing colonies on the Moon or in the asteroid main belt were not practical because the
massive energy needed to grow food for the humans and because of the scarcity (in the lunar
case) of some elements such as hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon. In their analyses, O’Neill and
Zubrin did not include the effects of robotic laborers in lieu of humans to lower the costs,
probably because robotic technology was too immature to predict with any confidence.
(Similarly, the present study ignores the possible effects of nanotechnology.) Since then, we
have seen how advances in robotics and additive manufacturing (3D printing) technologies are
game-changing for space colonization. As a result, it has become economically feasible – as we
attempt to demonstrate in this paper – to bootstrap a self-sustaining, self-expanding lunar
industry that will spread across the solar system at no further expense to the Earth’s economy.
Another game-changer is the discovery of lunar polar ice providing vast quantities of hydrogen,
nitrogen and carbon. The Moon has every element needed for healthy industry. In light of
these game-changing advances and discoveries, it is important to reassess the prospects for
initiating space industry.
Once successfully bootstrapped, a robotic network can access, process, transport, and utilize the
solar system’s resources for mankind’s benefit. Appropriately designed robots will not have the
problems traveling the vast distances of the solar system that humans have, and they can set up
the infrastructure that will enable us to follow. Within the first several decades a vital industry
could be established on the Moon and in the asteroid belt using technologies that are for the
most part only modestly advanced beyond today’s state-of-the-art. After that, human outposts,
laboratories, and observatories can spring up everywhere between the Kuiper belt and Mercury.
It can grow exponentially and provide mankind the ability to do things that today are only
dreams. To make this possible very soon, the majority of technology advancement needs to
occur in the automation of robotics and in additive manufacturing. Trends in these fields are
hopeful, so we think the scenarios we present here are not too optimistic. Therefore, we think
the space resource community has real reason to be motivated in its work. We are aiming for
the possible, not the fantastical.
This paper roughly assesses how much mass and time are needed on the Moon to reach the
“ignition” point of a self-sustaining and expanding industry, and it shows that the launch costs
for this mass can be quite low. It does not assess the cost of developing the necessary
technologies and of teleoperating them on the Moon until autonomy is achieved. While the
mass and time are shown to be quite low, it might be necessary to subdivide the bootstrapping
into even smaller, less expensive steps, creatively sharing them between public and private
sectors. We leave that business model strategizing to future work. Also, the assessment in this
paper is very rough and is intended mainly to organize our thinking on this topic, and to initiate
discussion and further study within the space community. A full study will be very complex and
require the involvement of a much larger group of contributors. We hope this will raise interest
and lead to that more comprehensive effort in the near future.

2

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Bootstrapping a Solar System Industry
Self-replicating systems have been studied as an innovative method to economically access
space resources (Freitas and Gilbreath 1980; Tiesenhausen and Darbro 1980; Freitas and
Zachary 1981; Chirikjian 2004). A 1980 summer study at the NASA Ames Research Center
(Freitas and Gilbreath 1980) showed that self-reproducing machines are theoretically possible.
It discussed a straw-man self-replicator of 100 metric tons mass, including 12 tons for paving
robots, 4.4 tons for mining robots, and 4 tons for mobile assembly and repair robots, to name a
few examples. Freitas and Zachary (1981) also used the figure of 100 metric tons per replica.
The 1980 study recommended among other things a technology development program for the
enabling technologies. This program has in effect occurred during the past three decades,
mostly driven by non-space, commercial industry but also in the past decade by the
Constellation project. As a result, these masses per replica can be reduced. For example, the
excavator masses used in this paper are only 0.35 tons for the first generation “seed” hardware,
based on trade studies and our experience with robotic lunar excavators and pavers that were
recently developed and field tested (Zacny et al. 2010; Mueller et al. 2009; Mueller and King
2008).
The 1980 study portrayed the seed replicator as a large factory, with warehouse operations,
centralized computing, and significant facility construction. Lipson and Malone (2002) showed
how Solid Freeform Fabrication technology (or additive manufacturing or 3D printing) could
reduce the complexity of a space manufacturing operation. This would reduce the mass of the
first seed replicator.
There are several additional strategies to reduce the launch mass of a seed replicator. The first
is to identify and use only the simplest system capable of replication. The second is to avoid full
“closure”. Closure is the ability to replicate all aspects of the system in space so that nothing
further is required from Earth to build replicas. Nearly full closure is vastly easier to achieve
than full closure (Freitas and Gilbreath 1980), because the manufacture of electronics and
computer chips requires heavy, high-tech equipment that would be expensive to launch from
Earth and would command much of the industry’s resources during replication. However,
incomplete closure results in very high launch masses later as the industry grows exponentially,
as we show below. A third strategy, which to our knowledge has not been discussed in the
literature, is to begin with a simpler, sub-replicating system and evolve it toward the selfreplication capability. In this strategy, the evolving system might never become a “selfreplicator” even after it reaches full closure, because each generation can continue creating
something significantly more advanced than itself. This is the strategy adopted here.
The first hardware sent to the Moon will be high-tech equipment built on Earth. However, the
high launch costs demand that it be mass-limited so it will have insufficient manufacturing
capability to replicate itself. It will construct a set of crude hardware made out of poor
materials, so the second generation is actually more primitive and inefficient than the first. The
goal from that point is to initiate a spiral of technological advancement until the Moon achieves
its own mature capabilities like Earth’s. This evolving approach will provide several benefits.
First, industry on the Moon can develop differently than on Earth. The environment, the
manufacturing materials, the operators (robots versus humans), and the products and target
markets are all different. Allowing it some reasonable time to develop will allow it to evolve an
appropriate set of technologies and methods that naturally fit these differences. Second, the
evolving approach supports the development of automation so that industry can then spread far
3

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
beyond the Moon. The technological spiral will develop the robotic “workers” in parallel with
the factories. It will also improve automated manufacturing techniques such as 3D printing.
The third and probably most important benefit is the economic one. As we show here, a space
economy can grow very rapidly, and it will quickly require massive amounts of electronics and
robotics unless there is full closure. The tiny computer chips alone become too expensive to
launch within a few decades as the industry grows exponentially, and therefore we will quickly
need lithography machines on the Moon to make the computer chips. The evolving approach
sends only a small and primitive set of machines as “colonists”, and the nascent lunar industry
develops over time – but still rapidly – toward the full sophistication that Earth cannot afford to
launch. This may seem too far reaching to a reader first exposed to the idea, but the key is the
on-going rapid advancement in robotics. After robotic dexterity, machine vision, and autonomy
improve for another couple of decades, robots will build lithography machines on the Moon as
easily as human workers build them on Earth. This future is not far away, considering the
exponential rate of technology development in terrestrial industries. Robotics experts are
optimistic that the necessary levels of automation will be developed quickly enough to support
the timeline we present here (Moravec, 2003).
So the objective is for the first robotic “colonists” on the Moon to fabricate a set of, say, 1700’sera machines and then to advance them steadily through the equivalent of the 1800’s, 1900’s,
and finally back into the 2000’s. We argue that this can be accomplished in just a few decades.
There are reasons why this technological spiral will be both easier and faster than when we
accomplished it on Earth. First, the majority of the technology does not need to be re-invented.
The knowledge will be provided by technologists on Earth. Second, the Earth will provide
material support in the early stages. We will send teleoperated robots and complex electronic
assemblies prior to achieving closure. On the other hand, there will be new challenges. For
example, we must gain experience in the lunar environment to learn how to adapt terrestrial
technologies to it.
For comparison, successful bootstrapping on the barren regolith of Earth’s continents began
with single-celled organisms then fungi and lichens, which created top soil (Kenrick and Crane
1997; Sleep and Bird 2008) so that diverse plants could take hold (Shear 1991), followed by
animals, humans, civilization, and increasingly sophisticated industry. To bootstrap industry on
the barren regolith of the Moon we do not wish to “begin at the beginning,” since that would
require nanotechnology as the analog of single-celled life, and that kind of nanotechnology does
not yet exist. We also do not wish to “begin at the end”, since that would require us to launch a
fully networked ecology of robots and industrial assets to the Moon, which is too massive to
afford. We wish instead to begin in the middle with large assets like robonauts and 3D printers
that require a complex ecology of interdependence, yet without the fully developed ecology.
We discuss the plausibility and affordability of this intermediate approach.
For the concept of lunar industry presented here we do not think the term “self-replicator” is
appropriate and so we will avoid the term. A self-replicator is by definition self-contained with
all of its parts co-located in a complete set. That entire set fabricates a new complete set that is
situated in a new location before the next replication cycle begins. This is unlike industry or
biology on Earth: neither businesses nor industries are self-replicators. Although biological
species are self-replicators, they require a vast number of other species in a highly networked
ecology to survive, and the ecology does not operate on a synchronized replication cycle. We
think the networked complexity of these examples is the more successful topology for space
industry because it is the one that naturally occurs and hence is probably the more efficient and
4

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
adapted for survival, as well as the more easily bootstrapped through an evolutionary process.
We therefore avoid any requirement that the various hardware assets remain together in a
closed set, and we allow instead for transportation to develop naturally between multiple,
specialized production sites. Thus, lithography machines to make computer chips can be
located in just one laboratory on the Moon, and their products can be transported to other sites
for incorporation into robots and machines. The original facility to house that equipment can
be built larger than necessary to allow for expansion and to gain economies of scale. This aspect
of networked complexity is not visible in the modeling presented here, but it will be evident
when modeling future expansion of industry beyond the Moon considering that space resources
are distributed in “zones” due to solar system formation processes (Hartmann 1985).

Hardware Elements in Lunar Industry
Each generation in the evolutionary bootstrapping process is characterized by the sophistication
of materials and construction methods that the previous generation used to fabricate it; by the
diversity of materials that it is able to make in fabricating the next generation; by the degree of
robotic autonomy it possesses; and by the quantity of robotics and electronics that must be
imported from Earth to make the next generation. Some characteristics of the evolving
generations are summarized notionally in Table 1.
Table 1. Generations of lunar industry.
Gen

Artificial
Intelligence
Insect-like

Scale of Industry

2.0

Human/Robotic
Interaction
Teleoperated and/or
locally-operated by a
human outpost
Teleoperated

Lizard-like

2.5

Teleoperated

Lizard-like

3.0

Teleoperated with
experiments in
autonomy

Lizard-like

Crude fabrication,
inefficient, but greater
throughput than 1.0
Diversifying processes,
especially volatiles and
metals
Larger, more complex
processing plants

4.0

Closely supervised
autonomy with some
teleoperation
Loosely supervised
autonomy

Mouse-like

Large plants for chemicals,
fabrics, metals

Mouse-like

6.0

Nearly full autonomy

Monkeylike

X.0

Autonomous robotics
pervasive throughout
solar system enabling
human presence

Human-like

Labs and factories for
electronics and robotics.
Shipyards to support main
belt
Large-scale, self-supporting
industry, exporting industry
to asteroid main belt
Robust exports/imports
through zones of solar
system

1.0

5.0

Imported, small-scale,
limited diversity

5

Materials
Manufactured
Gases, water, crude
alloys, ceramics,
solar cells
(Same)

Source of Electronics

Plastics, rubbers,
some chemicals

Fabricate crude
components plus import
electronics boxes
Locally build PC cards,
chassis and simple
components, but import
the chips
Building large assets
such as lithography
machines
Make chips locally.
Make bots in situ for
export to asteroid belt

Diversify chemicals,
Simple fabrics,
eventually polymers.
Sandwiched and
other advanced
material processes
Large scale
production

Makes all necessary
materials, increasing
sophistication
Material factories
specialized by zone
of the solar system

Import fully integrated
machines
Import electronics boxes

Makes everything
locally, increasing
sophistication
Electronics factories in
various locations

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
The set of assets within each generation is described below. To be conservative, we usually
assume that each asset is retired at the end of its generation so that only the more modern
assets of the new generation are involved in producing the generation after that (except as
noted below for solar cells and robonauts). This is overly conservative, but it allows that
hardware failures could disable some new assets that are unable to be repaired while assets
from the prior generation continue to operate to take their place.
In Generation (“Gen”) 2.5, the use of the decimal place (rather than incrementing to 3.0)
indicates that the assets of Gen 2.0 and Gen 2.5 are added cumulatively rather than retiring the
Gen 2.0 hardware. We do this because it is necessary to vastly diversify materials
manufacturing as quickly as possible, and this is accomplished by creating Gen 2.5 hardware
that is no more sophisticated than Gen 2.0 although capable of making different materials.
The technologies needed for mining, chemical processing, and metallurgy are for the most part
already existent in Earth’s industry. The feasibility of adapting them to the lunar environment
has been and is currently being demonstrated by the wide variety of successful space utilization
projects described elsewhere in this issue of the journal.
Excavators. The excavators will travel between the digging site and the resource processing site,
delivering sufficient lunar regolith each hour to maintain production rates of the other assets.
The details of the excavators are unimportant. In our modeling we assumed for specificity that
they are small and operate in a swarm. They may also be fitted with paving attachments (Hintze
and Quintana 2012).
Chemical plants for volatiles. Dry regolith or an ice/regolith mixture will be deposited into
hoppers and then fed into chemical plants. Electrical power for the processes is augmented
with thermal power from solar concentrators. One type of chemical plant will be concerned
with producing gases and liquids. These fluids will include oxygen, hydrogen, water,
hydrocarbons such as methane, and (in more advanced generations) solvents for industrial
processes. So far, NASA has developed and field tested only basic oxygen production systems,
including hydrogen reduction and carbothermal systems. More complex chemical processes
have been developed for terrestrial applications, and by adapting the lessons-learned from the
lunar projects it should not be difficult to adapt the other processes to the lunar case, too. For
specificity, we have described the chemical plants using particular masses, power levels, and
production rates after examining several sources of data. These include analyses of lunar
chemical plants (Mendell 1985, Taylor and Carrier 1993) and the actual construction and
performance of lunar chemical plants that our team and collaborators have recently field tested
on Mauna Kea in 2008 and 2010 (Boucher et al. 2011; Captain et al. 2010; Gustafson et al.
2010a; Gustafson et al. 2010b; Muscatello et al. 2009). The specifics are not too important as
we will vary these numbers over wide ranges to demonstrate general feasibility of the
bootstrapping process. Gen. 3.0 and subsequent will have larger throughputs than the earlier
generations, and they will gain from economies of scale by building much larger chemical plants
rather than reproducing a large number of smaller plants (Lieberman 1987; Gallagher et al.
2005). However, to be conservative we ignore the economies of scale and instead describe the
chemical plants as though they were units identical to the originals. These represent “units” of
chemical processing capability in larger plants rather than standalone assets.
Chemical plants for solids. Chemical plants are also needed to produce plastics and rubbers
from the lunar polar ice. This is possible because we now know that the ice contains large
6

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
quantities of carbon molecules (CO, CO2,…) as well as nitrogen-bearing and hydrogen-bearing
molecules (Colaprete et al. 2010; Gladstone et al. 2010). These materials may be needed for
gaskets, seals, and insulators, for example. Later diversity will introduce sheet materials, fabrics,
and layered and complex materials. Again, economies of scale are ignored in the model to be
conservative.
Metal and Ceramics Refinery. It will be crucial to manufacture metals and metal-oxide ceramics
and to improve the properties of the various alloys with subsequent generations. Processes to
do this from lunar soil have been described (Rao et al. 1979; Jarrett et al. 1980; Sargent and
Derby 1982; Lewis et al. 1988; Stefanescu et al. 1988; Landis 2007; Lu and Reddy 2008), and
some development work is on-going by our colleagues and collaborators. Notionally, the early
generations in our model will produce crude “mongrel alloys” by electrowinning or other
methods. Hardware constructed from those alloys will need to be massive to add strength to
make up for their poor mechanical properties. (This will be partially offset by the reduced forces
in low lunar gravity.) Subsequent generations of metal refineries will add processes and
material streams to improve the mechanics of the materials. Oxygen and other gases produced
by metal refining will be sent to the chemistry plants. Electrical power is augmented with
thermal power collected by solar concentrators.
Manufacturing. Additive manufacturing will have two forms: 3D printers that make parts that
are small enough to fit inside the printer, and larger units that move about robotically and add
material onto large structures external to themselves. The printers may eventually have
multiple material streams including metals and plastics to make complex assemblies in a single
pass. However, the earlier generations will require import from Earth of the most complex
assemblies, such as electronics packages and the assembly robots. Furthermore, “appropriate
technology” will mandate the design of simpler assets that can function without too many
complex or miniaturized components, simplifying their manufacture and reducing imports. To
achieve the final generations, the additive manufacturing technologies require advancement
beyond the current state of the art. However, gains are being made rapidly and it is very likely
the advancements will support the bootstrapping strategy presented here.
Solar Cell Manufacturer. Power will be provided mainly by solar cells. Ignatiev et al. (2001) and
Freundlich et al. (2005) have shown how these may be manufactured on the Moon even in the
earlier, more primitive generations of lunar industry. For specificity, we have described the
mass, power, and throughput of the solar cell manufacturers as per those earlier studies. We
show that these devices in the first and subsequent generations produce far more available
power than needed by the following generation. This excess power capacity grows
exponentially. We assume that solar cells are added cumulatively from one generation to the
next. Failure of solar cells by radiation damage and micrometeoroids has not been modeled
explicitly, but can be deducted from the exponentially growing excess.
Power Station. In the first generation, a power station is included in the mass of hardware
shipped to the Moon. This station includes power conditioning, docking stations, and cabling to
manage and distribute the solar power. It might also include a small nuclear reactor to support
human presence and as a backup system to support re-bootstrapping in case of system failure.
Robonauts. Robotic astronauts, or “robonauts”, will perform the assembly and maintenance
tasks. The name is borrowed from a particular robot developed by General Motors and the
NASA Johnson Space Center, with the assumption that robonauts in future lunar industry will be
7

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
the direct descendants of the current ones. The number of robonauts must grow rapidly as the
industry itself grows. At first the robonauts are imported from Earth. To keep the strategy
slightly more economical, they are not retired with each subsequent generation. Beginning with
the third generation their structural components are made on the Moon, while Earth continues
to send their cameras, computers, motors, and sensors. Eventually they are made completely
on the Moon.
At first the robonauts will be teleoperated from Earth. The approximately 2.5 second round-trip
communication time delay can be managed even for fine motor tasks, such as screwing parts
together by hand, by having a teleoperator on Earth interact with a virtual world that models
the robonaut and its environment rather than interact with the reality itself. The robonauts on
the Moon will mimic the behaviors they observe in the virtual reality as closely as possible using
existing levels of robotic autonomy. Resynchronization will occur in the virtual world using a
rubric designed to prevent operator confusion. Similar schemes are being developed for
telesurgery with large communication latency (Haidegger and Benyó 2003). This will make
teleoperation manageable for lunar operations, but it will require a growing and expensive
workforce of teleoperators on Earth plus sufficient communications bandwidth, and it will not
be extensible to the asteroid main belt or beyond. Therefore, with each generation, progress
will be made toward full autonomy.
Table 1 describes the autonomy in terms developed by Hans Moravec (Moravec 1999; Moravec
2003). Moravec’s “insect” level is when robots perform simple pre-programmed responses to
sensor inputs. Many machines operate at the insect level today. The “lizard” level is when
robots identify objects functionally to guide their motor tasks. Lizard-level robotics is already
appearing in laboratories on Earth and is making steady progress toward greater capability.
“Mouse” level is when the robots learn and improve the performance of their tasks through
simple positive and negative feedback. This is important because human industry is only
adapted to terrestrial conditions, but learning robots can adapt it to the multitude of
environments they will experience in the solar system. “Monkey” level is when the robots
maintain a mental model of the world including other agents. This provides them with insight
into the intent of other agents as well as foresight. “Human” level is when the robots have the
mental ability to reason abstractly, generalizing from specific learning situations to a broader
class of applications, and thus to make decisions in the face of the unexpected. These higher
levels of robotics will be necessary in the distant future when, for example, a robotic
construction crew is building a science lab on Pluto, many hours of time delay away from human
help. Extrapolating the computing speed of small, inexpensive microprocessors that are
commercially available, we expect by the year 2023 they will reach the speed Moravec
predicted as necessary to support human-level robotics. Even if Moore’s Law ended today, that
computer power is easily achieved by paralleling inexpensive microprocessors and by other
advances planned by computer chip manufacturers (Gargini 2005). On-going advances in
robotic software and artificial intelligence present a very optimistic picture that these levels of
robotics will be achieved as Moravec predicted, with lizard-level occurring by 2020, mouse-level
by 2030, monkey-level by 2040, and human-level by 2050. Only mouse-level is needed by the
end of bootstrapping on the Moon, but depending on how fast the strategy is carried out the
robotics sent to the asteroid belt may be at the monkey-level or higher.
Electronics Manufacturing. In the baseline model, when Gen. 2.5 is fabricated its assets include
some electronics manufacturing machines. Those machines themselves are built with
electronics imported from Earth, and they are capable of making only the crudest and simplest
8

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
of electronics components such as resistors and capacitors, which will not be miniaturized or
efficient. Gen. 3.0 and subsequent possess a greater diversity of electronics manufacturing
machines with increasing sophistication. By Gen. 5.0 we aim to have basic lithography machines
on the Moon, built using computer chips sent from Earth, so that by Gen. 5.0 all computer chips
can be made in space. The early computer chips will lack the transistor density of chips made on
Earth, but they will be adequate for “appropriate technology” in space. Later generations (not
modeled here) continue spiraling the sophistication of space industry so that eventually the
lithography machines and computer chips match the best of Earth’s.

Modeling the Bootstrapping
The process of bootstrapping was modeled in spreadsheet form using equations for mass
balance, energy balance, quantities of the various assets, and production times. The model
follows the hardware through six generations of increasing complexity until full independence
from the terrestrial economy is achieved. The parameters of the baseline model were
determined as described above for the various assets and were varied over wide ranges to
determine that the model produces robust and reasonable conclusions despite its simplicity.
Varying the parameters also identifies system dependencies and sensitivities. Identifying these
provides further indication of the probability of success in economical bootstrapping; if it turns
out that the only sensitive parameters are easily adjusted to put them into more manageable
ranges, or if alternative hardware configurations can remove those sensitivities entirely, then
economical bootstrapping should be easily achieved. The parameters of the model in Gen. 1.0
are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Baseline values for Generation 1.0 in Bootstrapping Model.
Asset

Power Distrib & Backup
Excavators (swarming)
Chem Plant 1 – Gases
Chem Plant 2 – Solids
Metals Refinery
Solar Cell Manufacturer
3D Printer 1 – Small parts
3D Printer 2 – Large parts
Robonaut assemblers
Total per Set

Qty.
per
set

1
5
1
1
1
1
4
4
3

Mass
Mass of
minus
Electronic
Electronic s (kg)
s
(kg)
2000
–
70
19
733
30
733
30
1019
19
169
19
169
19
300
19
135
15
~7.7 MT
launched to Moon

Power
(kW)

–
0.30
5.58
5.58
10.00
0.50
5.00
5.00
0.40
64.36
kW

Feedstock
Input
(kg/hr)

–
20
4
10
20
0.3
0.5
0.5
–
20 kg
regolith/hr

Product
Output
(kg/hr)

–
–
1.8
1.0
3.15
–
0.5
0.5
–
4 kg
parts/hr

Subsequent generations are modeled very simply as extrapolations from the first one using a
“crudeness factor” that tells how much more massive they are due to the use of mongrel alloys
and other poor materials produced from the regolith. Thus, Gen. 2.0 and Gen 2.5 have a
crudeness factor of 2.5, meaning they are 2.5 times as massive as Gen. 1.0 and thus take longer
to manufacture. Gen 3.0 has a crudeness factor of 1.5, but Gen. 4.0 and subsequent have a
crudeness factor of 1.0.
9

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
The quantity of electronics fabricated on the Moon also evolves with the generations. For Gen.
3.0, 4.0, 5.0 and 6.0, the targets are to make 90%, 95%, 99%, and 100% of the electronics on the
Moon, respectively. If these targets cannot be met, then the overall exponential growth of lunar
industry can be slowed down accordingly to keep it economical.
Another model parameter is the operation time per lunation. If the solar cells are located on a
“peak of eternal light” near the poles and are actuated to follow the sun, they might obtain
enough power for the industry to operate through 70% of the lunation. More equatorially, they
would support only 40% operation.
A flow diagram of the model is provided in Fig. 1. Because each generation feeds information to
the generations both before and after it, the model is recursive and must be iterated for
consistency each time any parameter is changed. The numbers of excavators, solar cell
manufacturers, and fluids chemical plants have not been optimized but instead set to values
much higher than needed. Excavators have many other jobs in building landing pads, stabilizing
roads, and preparing surfaces for building construction; solar cell pavers make excess solar cells
for conservatism; and fluids chemical plants produce large quantities of propellants or other
consumables for transport vehicles traveling to and from Earth and possibly for a human-tended
outpost. Human presence is highly desirable (but not mandatory) in the early parts of
bootstrapping. Spudis and Lavoie (2010) showed how a human outpost is very affordable when
based on the use of lunar resources. It is assumed that the consumables are provided to an
outpost or to commercial businesses that transport them profitably to low Earth orbit for other
space operations, so construction of storage tanks has not been included in the production
budget.
Additionally, in Gen. 3.0, 80 metric tons (MT) of construction equipment are fabricated (not
shown on Fig. 1 for simplicity). The production rate of this equipment is subtracted out from the
total production rate and hence reduces the number of basic sets of assets that can be
fabricated by that generation. The constructed equipment is needed in Gen. 4.0 so that dustfree laboratories can be built where the more sophisticated electronics manufacturing including
lithography machines will be housed. In Gen. 4.0, a total of 10 MT of metals are set aside as
reinforcement for the fabrication of those buildings out of regolith (also not shown on Fig. 1 for
simplicity). In Gen. 5.0, materials are stockpiled for the construction of a fleet of spacecraft to
export the industry to the asteroid main belt (also not shown on Fig. 1). This fleet transports 72
MT of industrial equipment and robonauts as the seed for Main Belt industry. Each spacecraft is
assumed to have 20 MT dry mass and to carry 12 MT payload, so there will be six such vehicles
in the fleet for a total of 120 MT materials set aside by Gen. 5.0. The delta-v to Ceres is 9.5
km/s, and the specific impulse of a hydrogen/oxygen engine is about 455 s. The required
propellant mass for this fleet is therefore about 1400 MT, which is just 2.8% of fluids produced
by the six generations of lunar industry as modeled here by the baseline case. This seems very
feasible.

Results of the Modeling
The modeling shows that bootstrapping a lunar industry according to this strategy may be
affordable over a wide and accessible region of parameter space.

10

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Figure 1. Flow diagram of model, showing Gen. N manufacturing Gen N+1. Heavy lines
represent iterated relationships between generations. Omitted details are described in
the text.

Growth Rate of Space Industry
The model predicts that the lunar industry can grow exponentially, as shown for two cases in
Figs. 2 and 3. The growth is dramatic and rapid, but it is reasonable considering that each basic
set of assets creates two or fewer new sets per year (plus the robonauts and other set-asides
such as construction of facilities and spacecraft in later generations). These cases assume a 70%
solar power duty cycle and generations spaced in 2-year intervals. The manufacturing rate is
assumed to be 0.5 kg/hr for each additive manufacturing unit. This is a high estimate and will be
discussed below. The first case uses this rate to reproduce hardware as quickly as possible and
thus achieve the largest space industry possible year-by-year. The second case voluntarily
pauses the manufacturing within each generation to allow for other tasks, such as technological
advancement, or manufacturing experiments, or for slow robonauts to catch up assembling
parts. This reduces the time-averaged manufacturing rate to half its maximum, which we find is
the minimum necessary to meet the survival and growth goals until full autonomy is achieved.
11

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
This results in a plateau of asset mass near 100 MT, delaying the exponential growth until after
full closure and thus minimizing the launch costs. It might be significant in Fig. 4 that the mass
plateau hovers around 100 MT because this is the same mass estimated in the NASA/Ames
summer study of 1980 (Freitas and Gilbreath 1980) for a single “seed” replicator. Thus, our
study agrees that this is the correct order of magnitude for industry to ignite while being just shy
of full closure. However, by evolving toward this mass over several generations, only a small
fraction of it needs to be launched from Earth (as shown below) and in the end it achieves full
closure, which the earlier non-evolving strategy did not attempt.

Figure 2. Growth of lunar industry by generations in 2-year intervals. Connecting lines
are a guide to the eye. Solid markers – Case with maximum manufacturing rate,
demonstrating exponential growth. Open markers – case with manufacturing rate
reduced by half. Solid lines – mass of assets, including both hardware brought from
Earth and hardware built on the Moon. Dashed lines – number of robonauts.

Figure 3. Production of materials and parts by each generation in 2-year intervals.
“Max” and “Red.” refer to maximum and reduced manufacturing rates. Solids includes
both plastics/rubbers and metals, but not electronics.

Launch Mass
The mass of hardware that must be launched to the Moon throughout the process is shown in
Fig. 4 for the maximum and reduced manufacturing rate cases. In the baseline case with
maximum manufacturing rate, a total of 41 MT is launched to the Moon. In the reduced rate
case, only 12 MT is launched to the Moon but the scale of industry is two orders of magnitude
smaller so the benefits of the industry are relatively delayed by eight years. Figure 4 also shows
12

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
how much mass would be needed from Earth year-by-year if full closure is not achieved: no
electronics and/or no computer chips manufactured on the Moon. Those masses grow
exponentially, and this demonstrates the need to achieve full closure.

Figure 4. Mass launched to Moon for each generation spaced in 2-year intervals. Lines
are a guide to the eye. Solid squares – baseline case operating at maximum
manufacturing rate. Variants: Open squares – manufacturing rate reduced to half of
capacity. Open circles – no electronics or computer chips made on the Moon. Open
triangles – no computer chips made on the Moon.

Manufacture of Solar Cells
Power needs and power availability are shown in Fig. 5. In Gen. 1.0, the power is from an asset
launched directly from Earth. In subsequent generations it is from solar cells fabricated on the
Moon. To be conservative, we scaled the fabrication of solar cells so that the available solar
power would be much greater than required throughout the process. This margin allows that
solar cell fabrication may not be as efficient as predicted, and it provides excess power for other
purposes.
Lunations and Solar Availability
The effects of reducing the solar duty cycle (i.e., solar power availability per lunation) from 70%
to 40% are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. They indicate the importance of the duty cycle, because
reducing it by less than a factor of two decreases the net growth by more than an order of
magnitude.
Printer Speed
Other than the initial launch costs, we do not care about the hardware mass as an independent
parameter; we only care about mass in comparison with manufacturing speed, because their
ratio predicts how long it takes the system to reproduce. Modeling identifies this ratio as a
critical parameter. Currently, commercially-available additive manufacturing prints either
metals or plastics at 0.10 to 0.15 kg/h. Although the modeling shows this can successfully
bootstrap the lunar industry with the masses we have estimated here, it probably needs to be
higher for practical reasons. We do not think we can lower hardware masses more than an
order of magnitude. Therefore, with such a low printing speed, each generation will be required
to function for as long as 10 years to produce the next generation as shown in Fig. 8, and during
13

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Figure 5. Power needs (dashed lines) and power generated (solid lines). The cases with maximum
manufacturing rate (solid markers) and reduced manufacturing rate (open markers) both have
vastly excess power capacity.

Figure 6. Mass of assets per generation for various solar power duty cycles. In these
cases, production rate is 1 kg/h and each generation lasts 2 years.

Figure 7. Number of Robonauts per generation for various solar power duty cycles. In
these cases, production rate is 1 kg/h and each generation lasts 2 years.

14

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
that time there will be hardware failures and growing labor costs for the teleoperators on Earth.
Adding more printers to the hardware set will increase the total printing rate, but this is a selflimiting strategy because each printer has its own mass that must be reproduced for the next
generation. In the limit of large numbers of printers the mass of all other assets becomes
insignificant and the reproduction time approaches the “specific reproduction” of the printer:
its mass divided by its production rate averaged over a lunation. For a 300 kg (large) printer
operating at 0.1 kg/h for 70% of a lunation, the specific reproduction is about 3 months.
However, with a crudeness factor of 2.5, it will take 7.5 months for Gen. 1.0 to make Gen. 2.0,
and that limit can be achieved only with a huge number of printers with extremely large launch
mass. Figure 8 shows these reproduction times predicted by the model for Gen. 1.0 as a
function of increasing numbers of printers at various production rates. Only limited benefit is
obtained by reducing the printer mass in half, and for smaller (more reasonable) numbers of
printers per set the printer mass is not a significant parameter. (The total mass of assets must
be reduced to significantly reduce the reproduction time.) Therefore, apart from dramatic
reductions in total asset mass, we can achieve acceptably small reproduction times on the order
of a few months only by increasing the throughput of the manufacturing units by a factor of four
or greater. This might be easily achieved over the next few years with some technology
investment (Lott, 2009). However, it is likely we will need to use a combination of
manufacturing techniques to get a sufficiently high manufacturing rate. Since huge numbers of
identical parts will be produced, it makes sense to use the additive manufacturing units to print
the injection moulds and then to cast the parts in aluminum or iron at a much higher rate.
Robonauts will be capable of grinding, polishing or otherwise machining the parts after removal
from the moulds. The use of casting, plus other manufacturing processes where appropriate,
should easily achieve a 1 kg/h rate.

Fig. 8. Numbers of printers per set vs. reproduction time in years for Gen. 1.0
(crudeness factor 2.5 for the next generation). The standard mass (“Std. Mass”) cases
use equal numbers of the smaller 169 kg printer and the larger 519 kg unit (or one extra
of the smaller size for odd numbers of printers). The “Low Mass” cases are with these
masses divided by two.

The maximum production of a generation is the printer rate times the solar duty cycle times the
length of the generation. In the baseline case with 70% duty cycle, 0.4 kg/h printer speeds, and
2-year generations, maximum production is about 6 MT. One scheme to offset slower printers
is to increase the length of the generations to keep total production constant. Figures 9 and 10
show the mass of assets and the number of robonauts, respectively, produced by each
generation when the maximum production is 6 MT at various printer speeds. It is interesting to
15

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
note that by the end of bootstrapping there are more robonauts for the high printer speed cases
but more assets for the low printer speed cases. This is because with higher printer speeds the
generations are very short and more robonauts must be manufactured in one generation to
accomplish the assembly of the following generation in its own short window. Diverting
resources to the manufacture of robonauts takes them away from the manufacture of basic sets
of assets. The relationships are non-monotonic, as Fig. 11 illustrates.

Figure 9. Mass of assets in each generation by year of its completion for various
manufacturing speeds. The generation numbering labels are annoted on the chart. In
these cases, the maximum production per generation is held constant at 6 MT.

Figure 10. Number of robonauts fabricated by each generation (non-cumulative) versus
year of completion of each generation, for the same cases shown in Fig. 9. The
numbering labels of the generations are annoted on the chart. No robonauts were
made by the first two generations.

Figure 11. Mass of assets versus number of robonauts manufactured for Gen. 6.0 for
the same cases shown in Figs. 9 and 10.

16

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
Robonaut Productivity
In the model, the robonaut productivity is described by the “Robonaut Weeks Per Asset”
(RWPA) metric, defined as the number of robonaut work weeks that are required to assemble
one “average” asset. The model calculates how many assets will be constructed by a
generation, with each excavator, robonaut, unit of chemical plant, etc., counting as one asset. It
multiplies the total count by the RWPA and then divides by the number of available work weeks
to calculate how many robonauts will be needed to finish assembly on time in that generation.
In the nominal case, the RWPA for successive generations is 4, 4, 6, 7, 7 and 8, increasing
because the assemblies become more sophisticated as “appropriate technology” evolves into
“mature technology” and presumably takes longer to assemble. To be conservative it is
assumed that the increasing autonomy and improving dexterity of robotics cannot fully
compensate for this so the RWPA must increase. The dependence on robonaut productivity is
tested by increasing RWPA by a factor of three for each generation, respectively, to simulate
slower robonauts, or by dividing it by a factor of three to simulate faster robonauts, while
keeping the generation period constant at 2 years. These cases are for printer speeds of 0.4
kg/h operating at maximum rate, and for a solar duty cycle of 70%. Figure 12 shows that for
larger RWPA the number of robonauts must increase in the earlier generations, because the
minimum asset set must be completed for the industry to survive no matter how slow the
robonauts are. In later generations, for larger RWPA the number of robonauts is the same as in
the nominal case, but they manufacture fewer assets. Figure 13 shows how this affects growth
of the lunar industry. Figure 14 shows the effects upon launch mass. Faster robonauts lowers
the total launch mass to about 12 MT. For slower robonauts, more of them are required in the
earlier generations to achieve minimal survival of the industry, and since they are being shipped
from Earth in the early stages, the total launch mass increases dramatically to about 83 MT.
However, an alternative strategy would be to stretch out the generation time longer than 2
years. Thus, no matter how large the RWPA, the production of parts can occur at a leisurely
pace governed by slow assembly speed of the robonauts, and launch mass can be maintained at
or below nominal values by stretching out the bootstrapping process another 6 to 8 years.

Figure 12. Number of Robonauts per generation for various robonaut productivity
rates. Cases with fast and slow robonauts assume RWPA of 1/3 and 3 times the nominal
case, respectively.

17

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Figure 13. Growth of asset mass for various robonaut productivity rates. Cases with
fast and slow robonauts assume RWPA of 1/3 and 3 times the nominal case,
respectively.

Figure 14. Required launch mass for each generation in two-year intervals with various
robonaut productivity rates. Cases with fast and slow robonauts assume RWPA of 1/3
and 3 times the nominal case, respectively.

Discussion
The details of the modeling results are not as important as the general picture it paints: that
bootstrapping space industry can be achieved in a very short time, for relatively little cost,
beginning immediately. What makes this possible now is that robotics with artificial intelligence
is advancing at a pace to make machines as capable as humans at complex manufacturing tasks
within a few decades. The automation is already sufficient to support teleoperated assembly of
parts that are manufactured on the Moon.
Launch costs are one of the main barriers to activity in space. They are typically on the order of
$10,000 (US dollars) per kilogram to low earth orbit (LEO) (Federal Aviation Administration
2009; Perez 2011). It is difficult to estimate the cost of transporting hardware to the lunar
surface because that capability has never existed commercially. The gear ratio is about 4:1
(Rapp 2010), meaning that for every one kilogram landed near the lunar poles approximately
four kilograms must be launched from Earth to LEO. Assessing just the LEO costs with this gear
ratio, a 100 MT seed replicator on the lunar surface would have required $4 billion in launch
costs to LEO. Reducing the lunar surface mass to 12 MT via the evolving approach presented
18

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
here reduces the LEO launch costs to about $0.5 billion. Furthermore, SpaceX is expecting about
$1500/kg to $2400/kg launch cost to LEO in the near future with its Falcon 9 Heavy launch
vehicle (Space Exploration Technologies Corp. 2012). This brings the LEO launch costs even
lower to about 2-3% of the original figure. Future studies may assess cost of transportation to
the lunar surface and the cost of labor to develop and teleoperate lunar industry, but clearly the
prospects for initiating the industry are much better now than they were in 1980.
This robotic industry in space leads to a grand vision. After the industry becomes selfsupporting it can be sent to other parts of the solar system. The asteroid belt has everything
necessary for it: water, carbon, silicates, metals, oxygen, solar energy (with much larger
collecting arrays), etc. The ices in the lunar poles are a limited resource so it will be important to
move the center of industry to the asteroids as quickly as possible. There, the billion-fold
greater resources could allow the industry to expand exponentially until it dwarfs that of the
entire Earth within just a few decades. Continued advances in artificial intelligence will be
needed to control and manage such a large industry. The United States economy uses 1020 J of
energy per year including fossil fuels, nuclear, and renewables (Department of Energy 2010).
Figure 3 shows Gen. 5.0 (at 70% duty cycle) using 1015 J of energy per year. Multiplying this by a
factor of 3 per year, it would exceed the energy usage of the US within 11 more years. After 12
more years it would exceed the US economy by a factor of a million. After another decade it
would exceed the US economy by a factor of a billion. Somewhere within that brief period of
time, humanity will have gained the ability to do everything we can dream of doing in space.
Robotic space industry will also bring great dividends back to Earth. For example, it can create
space beamed solar power (SBSP) satellites in Earth orbit. Commonly it is explained that SBSP is
not competitive with other energy sources due to launch costs. Robotic space industry can
eliminate not only the launch costs but also the construction costs, turning it into an essentially
free, clean, and highly scalable energy source.
The modeling also indicates a significant national security risk. On Earth, the industry of a nation
is limited by its resources including real estate, energy, ores, and the education and size of its
labor pool. In a robotic industry occupying a solar system, the resources and real estate are a
billion times greater. Education and talents are learned once then transmitted electronically to
all robotic laborers, which are mass produced by the industry itself. Until this industry begins to
feel the limits of the entire solar system, it can grow exponentially. If any nation initiates and
controls such an industry first, then it will have a perpetual lead in industrial power over any
other nation that initiates the same capability second.
Space industry will fundamentally change the status of humanity in the solar system. Humans
are a species adapted to living at the top of a food chain, and we need something analogous to
the food chain in space to process its resources for us. That would free us from activities related
to merely surviving in space, enabling a greater focus on activities that are uniquely human.
When we spread robotic industry throughout the solar system, it will become the analog of
Earth’s biosphere and food chain. We might call it a robotosphere. The interrelationship of
robots in space may be studied by robo-ecologists learning how to optimize the robotosphere in
support of humanity’s goals. We will want to design it for aesthetics as much as for
functionality. It can work under the direction of human artists and architects to fill outposts and
cities throughout the solar system with works of beauty. It can participate with biological life in
terraforming planets and moons in this solar system and beyond. This robotic/biological
ecosphere will become the focus of lifelong study for future generations of scientists.
19

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
The analogy to biological ecology is not perfect. On Earth, most life forms get their resources in
one location. Most that migrate do so seasonally and get everything they need in one location
at a time. In the solar system, the robots will probably not get everything they need in any one
zone. Metals are mostly available in the asteroid belt, while volatiles are mostly in the outer
solar system, for example. To fulfill their potential the robots will need to set up logistics chains,
transporting resources between the various zones. In a sense the robotosphere will function as
a single organism. By sending seed ships to industrialize other solar systems, it produces
offspring. Riding along as endosymbionts of this organism is one way for man to travel between
the stars and extend human culture throughout the Milky Way.

Conclusion
We are not yet able to model future space industry in much detail, but we can explore some of
its main features in this sort of simple model. The modeling looks very optimistic as we vary its
parameters to study their relationships, and it indicates that bootstrapping a space-based,
robotic, self-sustaining industry is eminently feasible. If we begin working on it today, a vibrant
solar system economy will occur within our children’s lifetimes or possibly within our own. All
of the benefits of its billion-fold industrial power will be at humanity’s service for no cost
beyond the initial investment of 12 to 41 MT of hardware landed on the Moon (per Fig. 2), plus
the cost of a modest robotics and manufacturing development program leading up to that and
then the labor to teleoperate the systems until they become autonomous. With its selfsustaining industrial might we can then provide resources back to Earth, clean up the Earth,
terraform Mars, build space colonies, support science and the humanities in a well-endowed
institute located in space, and send replicas of our robotic industry to other solar systems where
it will do all these same things in advance of our arrival.

References
Almeida, Pedro de, and Silva, Pedro D. (2009). "The peak of oil production—Timings and market
recognition." Energy Policy, 37(4), 1267–1276.
Bentley, R. W. (2002). "Global oil & gas depletion: an overview." Energy Policy, 30(3), 189–205.
Boucher , Dale S., Atwell, J. Tom, Theiss, Ronny, Armstrong, Rob , and Benigni, Sam (2011).
“Development and Testing of an Autonomous Regolith Excavation and Delivery System.” Proc.,
49th American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Orlando, FL.
Captain, Janine, Quinn, Jackie, Moss, Thomas, and Weis, Kyle (2010). “RESOLVE’s Field
Demonstration on Mauna Kea, Hawaii 2010.” Proc., AIAA Space 2010 Conference, Anaheim, CA.
Chirikjian, Gregory S. (2004). “An Architecture for Self-Replicating Lunar Factories.” National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Institute of Advanced Concepts (NIAC) Phase 1
Final Report, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
Colaprete, Anthony, Schultz, Peter, Heldmann, Jennifer, Wooden, Diane, Shirley, Mark,
Ennico, Kimberly, Hermalyn, Brendan, Marshall, William, Ricco, Antonio, Elphic, Richard C.,
Goldstein, David, Summy, Dustin, Bart, Gwendolyn D., Asphaug, Erik, Korycansky, Don,
20

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
Landis, David, and Sollitt, Luke (2010). “Detection of Water in the LCROSS Ejecta Plume.” Science
330(6003), 463–468.
Department of Energy (2010). “Annual Energy Review 2009.” DOE/EIA-0384, US Energy
Information Administration, Washington, D.C..
Duke, Michael B., Gaddis, Lisa R., Taylor, G. Jeffrey, Schmitt, Harrison H. (2006). "Development
of the Moon." Reviews in Mineralogy & Geochemistry, v. 60, pp. 597–656.
Federal Aviation Administration (2009). Semi-Annual Launch Report: Second Half of 2009. Report
FAA/HQ-10998 INDD, Washington, D.C.
Freitas, Robert A., Jr., and Gilbreath, William P. (1980). “Advanced Automation for Space
Missions.” NASA Conference Publication 2255, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffet Field.
Freitas, Robert A., Jr., and Zachary, William B. (1981). “A Self-Replicating, Growing Lunar
Factory.” Space Manufacturing 4: Proc. Fifth Princeton/AIAA Conference, eds. J. Grey and L.A.
Ham Dan, AIAA, New York, May 18-21, 109–119.
Freundlich, Alexandre, Ignatiev, Alex, Horton,Charles, Duke, Michael, Curren, Peter, and Sibille,
Laurent (2005). "Manufacture of Solar Cells on the Moon." Proc., 31st Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Orlando, FL, 794–797.
Gallagher, Paul W., Brubaker, Heather, and Shapouri, Hosein (2005). “Plant size: Capital cost
relationships in the dry mill ethanol industry.” Biomass and Bioenergy, 28(6), 565–571.
Gargini, Paolo (2005). “Extending Moore’s Law and Heterogeneous Integration.” Sping 2005
Seminar Series, US-Asia Technology Management Center, Stanford, CA,
<http://asia.stanford.edu/events/Spring05/slides/050331-Gargini.pdf> (March 22, 2012).
Gladstone, G. Randall, Hurley, Dana M., Retherford, Kurt D., Feldman, Paul D., Pryor, Wayne R.,
Chaufray, Jean-Yves, Versteeg, Maarten, Greathouse, Thomas K., Steffl, Andrew J., Throop,
Henry, Parker, Joel Wm., Kaufmann, David E., Egan, Anthony F., Davis, Michael W., Slater, David
C., Mukherjee, Joey, Miles, Paul F., Hendrix, Amanda R., Colaprete, Anthony, and Stern, S. Alan
(2010). “LRO-LAMP Observations of the LCROSS Impact Plume.” Science 330(6003), 472-476.
Gustafson, Robert J., White, Brant C., Fidler, Michael J., and Muscatello, Anthony C. (2010a).
“Demonstrating the Solar Carbothermal Reduction of Lunar Regolith to Produce Oxygen.” Proc.,
48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL.
Gustafson, Robert J., White, Brant C., and Fidler, Michael J. (2010b). “Analog Field Testing of the
Carbothermal Regolith Reduction Processing System.” Proc., AIAA Space 2010 Conference,
Anaheim, CA.
Haidegger, Tamás, and Benyó, Zoltán (2010). “Extreme Telesurgery.” Robot Surgery, Seung Hyuk
Baik, ed., INTECH, Croatia, 25–44.

21

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
Hartmann, William K. (1985). "The Resource Base in our Solar System." Interstellar Migration
and the Human Experience, Ben R. Finney and Eric M. Jones, eds., Univ. of Calif. Press, Berkeley,
CA., 26-41.
Hintze, Paul E. and Quintana, Stephanie (2012). "Building a Lunar or Martian Launch Pad with in
situ Materials: Recent Laboratory and Field Studies." J. Aerospace Engineering (this issue), TBD.
Ignatiev, A., Freundlich, A., Duke, M., Rosenberg, S., and Makel, D. (2001). “In-situ electric power
generation to support solar system exploration and colonization: manufacture of thin film silicon
solar cells on the Moon.” Proc., IEEE Aerospace Conference 2001, vol. 7, Big Sky, MT.
Jarrett, N., Das, S.K., Haupin, W. E. (1980). "Extraction of oxygen and metals from lunar ores."
Space Solar Power Review, 1(4), 281-287.
Kenrick, Paul, and Crane, Peter R. (1997). "The origin and early evolution of plants on land."
Nature, 389(6646), 33-39.
Landis, Geoffrey A. (2007). "Materials refining on the Moon." Acta Astronautica, 60(10-11), 906915.
Lewis, John S., Jones, Thomas D., Farrand, William H. (1988). "Carbonyl extraction of lunar and
asteroidal metals." Proc., Space '88 Conference, Reston, VA.
Lewis, John S., and Lewis, Ruth A. (1987). Space Resources: Breaking the Bonds of Earth,
Columbia University Press, NY.
Lieberman, Marvin B. (1987). "Market Growth, Economies of Scale, and Plant Size in the
Chemical Processing Industries." J. Industrial Economics, 36(2), 175-191.
Lin, Bo-qiang, and Liu, Jiang-hua (2010). "Estimating coal production peak and trends of coal
imports in China." Energy Policy, 38 (1), 512-519.
Lipson, Hod and Malone, Evan (2002). “Autonomous Self-Extending Machines for Accelerating
Space Exploration.” NIAC-CP-01-02, Phase 1 Final Report, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
Lissauer, Jack J. (1993), "Planet formation," Annual review of astronomy and astrophysics 31,
129-174.
Lott, Simon (2009). “Additive layer manufacture expands options for airframes.” Aerospace
Manufacturing, <http://www.aero-mag.com/features/41/200910/59/> (March 22, 2012).
Lu, Y. and Reddy, R.G. (2008). "Extraction of Metals and Oxygen from Lunar Soil." High
Temperature Materials and Processes, 27(4), 223–234.
Mendell, Wendell W., ed. (1985). Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century. Lunar and
Planetary Institute, Houston, TX, 529—618.

22

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.
Moravec, Hans (1999). Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind. Oxford Univ. Press, New
York.
Moravec, Hans (2003). “Robots, After All.” Comm. ACM, 46(10), 91–97.
Mudd, G.M., and Ward, J.D. (2008). "Will Sustainability Constraints Cause ‘Peak Minerals,'" Proc.
of 3rd International Conference on Sustainability Engineering & Science: Blueprints for
Sustainable Infrastructure, Auckland, NZ.
Mueller, Robert P., and King, Robert H. (2008), “Trade Study of Excavation Tools and Equipment
for Lunar Outpost Development and ISRU.” Ameican Institute of Physics (AIP) Conference
Proceedings, 969(1), 237-244.
Mueller, Robert P., Metzger, Philip T., and Mantovani, James G. (2010). “Regolith as a resource
in solar system human and robotic exploration.” Proc., 61st International Astronautics
Conference, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mueller, Robert P., Wilkinson, R. Allen, Gallo, Christopher A., Nick, Andrew J., Schuler, Jason M.,
and King, Robert H. (2009). "Lightweight Bulldozer Attachment for Construction and Excavation
on the Lunar Surface." Proc., AIAA Space 2009 Conference, Reston, VA.
Muscatello, Anthony C., Captain, James E., Quinn, Jacqueline W., Gibson, Tracy L., Perusich,
Stephen A., Weis, Kyle H. (2009). “Lunar Water Resource Demonstration (LWRD) Test Results.”
Proc., AIAA Space 2009 Conference, Pasadena, CA.
O’Neill, Gerard K. (1989). The High Frontier. Space Studies Institute Press, Princeton, NJ, 116.
Perez, Edouard (2011). Ariane 5 User’s Manual, Iss. 5, Rev. 1. Arianespace, Paris, France.
Rao, D.B., Choudary, U.V., Erstfeld, T.E., Williams, R.J., And Chang, Y.A. (1979). "Extraction
processes for the production of aluminum, titanium, iron, magnesium, and oxygen and
nonterrestrial sources." Space Resources and Space Settlements, NASA SP-428, Billingham, J.,
Gilbreath, W. and O'Leary, B., eds, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffet Field, CA, 257-274.
Rapp, Donald (2010). Human Missions to Mars: Enabling Technologies for Exploring the Red
Planet. Praxis Publishing, Chichester, UK, 151.
Sargent, P.M. , and Derby, B. (1982). "Advanced alloys and metal/ceramic composites from lunar
source materials." Acta Astronautica, 9(9), 593-595.
Shear, William A. (1991). "The early development of terrestrial ecosystems." Nature, 351(6324),
283–289.
Sleep, Norman H., and Bird, Dennis K. (2008). "Evolutionary ecology during the rise of dioxygen
in the Earth’s atmosphere." Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol Sci, 363(1504), 2651–2664.
Space Exploration Technologies Corp. (2012). “Falcon Heavy Overview.” SpaceX,
<http://www.spacex.com/falcon_heavy.php> (March 22, 2012).
23

Preprint. To appear in Journal of Aerospace Engineering.

Spudis, Paul D. and Tony Lavoie (2010). “Mission and Implementation of an Affordable Lunar
Return.” Proc., Space Manufacturing 14, Space Studies Institute, Mojave, CA.
Stefanescu, D.M., Grugel,R.N., and Curreri, P.A. (1998). "In Situ Resource Utilization for
Processing of Metal Alloys on Lunar and Mars Bases." Proc., ASCE Space '98 Conference,
Albuquerque, NM.
Taylor, Lawrence A., and Carrier, W. David, III (1993). "Oxygen production on the moon: An
overview and evaluation." Resources of Near-Earth Space, Lewis, J.S., Matthews, M.S., and
Guerrieri. M.L., eds., Space Science Series, The University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 69-108.
Tiesenhausen, G. von, and Darbro, W.A. (1980). “Self-Replicating Systems – A Systems
Engineering Approach.” NASA TM-78304, Washington, D.C.
Zacny, Kris, Mueller, Robert P., Craft, Jack, Wilson, Jack, Hedlund, Magnus, and Cohen, Joanna
(2010)."Five-Step Parametric Prediction and Optimization Tool for Lunar Surface Systems
Excavation Tasks." Proc., ASCE Earth and Space 2010 Conference, Honolulu, HI.
Zubrin, Robert (1999). Entering Space: Creating a Spacefaring Civilization. Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Putnam Publisher, New York, 80-82, 146-148.

24

