Review

Ceramics—The Forgotten but Essential Ingredients for a Circular
Economy on the Moon
Alex Ellery
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada;
aellery@mae.carleton.ca; Tel.: +1-613-261-3765

Abstract
Settlement on the Moon will require full exploitation of its resources if such settlements are
to be permanent. Such in situ resource utilisation (ISRU) has primarily been focused on
accessing water ice at the lunar poles and the use of raw lunar regolith as a compressive
building material. Some work has also examined the extraction of metals, but there has
been little consideration of the many useful ceramics that can be extracted from the Moon
and how they may be fabricated. We introduce a strategy for full lunar industrialisation
based on a circular lunar industrial ecology and examine the contribution of ceramics.
We review ceramic fabrication methods but focus primarily on 3D printing approaches.
The popular direct ink writing method is less suitable for the Moon and other methods
require polymers which are scarce on the Moon. This turns out to be crucial, suggesting
that full industrialisation of the Moon cannot be completed until the problem of ceramic
fabrication is resolved, most likely in conjunction with polymer synthesis from potential
carbon sources.
Keywords: ceramics; in situ resource utilisation; lunar industrialisation; lunar industrial
ecology; ceramic 3D printing

Academic Editors: Francesco Baino,
Pardeep Gianchandani, Enrico
Fabrizio, Bartolomeo Megna and
Manuela Ceraulo
Received: 31 May 2025
Revised: 12 August 2025
Accepted: 20 August 2025
Published: 22 August 2025
Citation: Ellery, A. Ceramics—The
Forgotten but Essential Ingredients for
a Circular Economy on the Moon.
Ceramics 2025, 8, 107. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ceramics8030107
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

1. Introduction
It is anticipated that human exploration of the Moon will evolve toward settlement on
the Moon and that such settlement will require the exploitation of local lunar resources:
in situ resource utilisation (ISRU). Most interest has been focussed on water ice mining in
permanently shadowed craters at the South Pole, supplemented by the use of local regolith
as a construction material. Regolith is a potential resource that may be 3D printed for
the construction of lunar or Martian bases [1]. D-shaping and contour crafting are two of
several methods that involve 3D printing regolith with binders or cements for constructing
protective shells for such bases [2]. Both D-shaping and contour crafting require bulk
volumes of binder imported from Earth. D-shaping utilises MgCl2 binder to react with
MgO in lunar regolith (Sorel cement), while contour crafting requires polymer binder. An
example of a potentially in situ-resourced cement is sulpho-aluminate cement [3]. These
approaches assume minimum processing of the resource to render it useful. A lunar
base also requires internal infrastructure that may also be in situ-resourced [4]. Similarly,
providing both electrical power and storage may be enabled using in situ resources [5,6].
Given the necessity for supporting human life within lunar bases, lunar water resources will
be essential for hydroponic food growth [7]. Although regolith is a 3D printable ceramic in
situ resource, we shall not address lunar base construction here, for which there are notably
excellent reviews [8].

https://doi.org/10.3390/ceramics8030107

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

2 of 23

We are interested in building a lunar infrastructure from lunar resources to minimise
the capital cost of launching infrastructure from Earth. This requires significant processing
of lunar resources to yield functional materials. We concern ourselves with a specific
approach to ISRU that yields a range of lunar mineral-derived materials, including ceramics
that have high utility rather than native lunar regolith. Most efforts have been focussed
on the extraction of metals from lunar minerals, but we shall consider the neglected
ceramic resources on the Moon. It is expected that partial gravity on the Moon will have
a negligible effect on processing methods compared with microgravity in orbit [9] or
milligravity conditions associated with asteroid processing [10]. Nevertheless, the Moon
imposes particular challenges due to its limited diversity of material resources, and this
will dominate the feasibility of manufacturing ceramics.
We explore the manufacture and exploitation of ceramics derived from lunar resources.
Section 2 briefly describes the Moon’s mineralogy and volatiles to provide context to
the subsequent sections. Section 3 defines the lunar industrial ecology as the context for
exploring ceramics manufacture; Section 4 explores thermal sintering and the problem of
brittleness; Section 5 explores ceramic 3D printing methods for the Moon and finds them
wanting; Section 6 introduces the importance of polymers; Section 7 explores the use of
clays; Section 8 briefly looks at non-clay lunar mineral uses; Section 9 discusses the use of
direct thermal heating of ceramics using solar concentrators; and Section 10 concludes that
polymers are an essential partner to ceramics and lunar industrialisation will flounder until
an alternative to polymers can be found.

2. Lunar Resources
The Moon is covered in a layer of regolith with up to 20% glasses derived from fragmented parental rock with an average grain size of ~60–80 µm to a depth of ~4–5 m in the
mare and ~10–15 m in the highlands [11]. Lunar mineralogy is broadly divisible into the
anorthositic highlands and the basaltic mare. Anorthosite is dominated by the feldspar anorthite (CaAl2 Si2 O8 ) while mare basalt may have high-Ti or low-Ti content, the former characterised by 10–20% ilmenite (FeTiO3 ). The dominant minerals on the Moon are plagioclase
feldspar (dominantly anorthite), pyroxene (such as augite (Ca,Fe,Mg,Ti,Al)2 Si2 O6 ), olivine
(dominated by forsterite Mg2 SiO4 ), ilmenite and spinel (dominated by MgAl2 O4 ) [12], all
of which may be exploited as resources [13]. Orthopyroxene, olivine and spinel lithologies
are located primarily on the lunar farside and are believed to have originated from large
magmatic intrusions (plutons) from the mantle into the lunar crust [14]. Lunar minerals
are highly oxidised, representing sources of oxygen through chemical or electrolytic reduction. However, the Moon is depleted in Na, Zn and Cu which imposes the necessity for
lunar-constrained industrialisation. Halogens such as Cl and F are highly rarified but are
concentrated in rare apatite (Ca5 (PO4 )3 (OH,F,Cl)) minerals.
KREEP basalts of the Procellarum KREEP Terrane on the northwest nearside are characterised by more Na-rich plagioclases and relatively elevated concentrations of potassium,
rare earth elements (REE), phosphorus, thorium and uranium. The rare earth elements
occur primarily in the form of ~µm monazite ((Ce,La,Nd,Th)PO4 ) inclusions in pyroxene
grains. The scarcer yttrobetafite ((Ca,Y,U,Th,Pb,REE)2 (Ti,Nb)2 O2 ) is a potential source of
yttrium, but this requires a complex series of chemical processes and reagents. Granite
in (KREEPy) highland rocks is rare on the Moon, but it is a potentially useful resource
for [15]: (i) silica minerals (primarily cristobalite rather than quartz); (ii) potassium feldspar
KAlSi3 O8 ; and (iii) zircons ZrSiO4 . However, the global abundance of granites is low. Indigenous lunar minerals are supplemented by minor amounts: <0.1% of meteoritic material
from asteroid impacts including Fe, Ni, Co and troilite FeS.

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

3 of 23

Much more rarified is the lunar inventory of volatiles [16]. In particular, C, N and S are
scarce within concentrations of ~1–100 ppm in regolith implanted by solar wind, though
there are apparent higher concentrations in permanently shadowed craters such as Cabeus:
0.3% NH3 , 0.1% CO2 and 0.04% CH4 . Similarly, water ice is concentrated in permanently
shadowed craters of the lunar poles with concentrations of 5.6 ± 2.9% in the Cabeus crater.
The cryogenic temperatures of ~25–40 K in permanently shadowed craters present major
challenges for lunar operations. Concentration of 3 He is highly rarified ~20 ppb in mature
ilmenite minerals. Although these volatiles may be released by heating ~700 ◦ C, they are
too scarce to be a viable resource. Carbon, in particular, averages ~100–120 ppm by weight
of regolith so there is ~100 mg carbon per kg of regolith, i.e., extraction of 1 kg carbon
would require excavating and heating 10 tonnes of regolith.
Nevertheless, the desirability for in situ resource utilisation is clear—it costs
~$750,000/kg to reach the surface of the Moon (Astrobotic Technology fees), so the use
of in situ resources saves the transport cost, but it is essential that production machines’
total lifetime mass throughput exceed its own mass. On Earth, this is higher at ~105 for
excavation of bulk material than for manufacturing machines at ~103 which would be
expected to be similar for the Moon, i.e., a saving of S750M–$75B per kg of landed lunar
manufacturing asset.
The spinel MgAl2 O4 is a resource available on the Moon that may be exploited directly
(though contamination with ubiquitous Fe darkens glasses, so it may have to be synthesised
from its constituents). Pure MgAl2 O4 can also be synthesised, either from magnesia and
alumina powders heated at 1800 ◦ C, or from gibbsite (Al(OH)3 ) in HCl solution and
magnesia powders, heated to 80 ◦ C for 7h, then precipitated when mixed with alkali
hydroxide and then calcined at 1000–1400 ◦ C [17], yielding optical properties tailored
by the calcination temperature [18]. A common additive is 0.5% CaO which increases
the sintering rate and yields maximum densification [19]. Sintering is typically achieved
through hot isostatic pressing (HIP) [20]. The chief problem is its brittleness, which renders
it difficult to machine, but laser-assisted and ultrasonic vibration-assisted machining of
ceramics offer mitigation strategies [20]. MgAl2 O4 has applications as refractory linings
of high thermal resistance and low thermal expansion (with a melting point of 2135 ◦ C),
electric insulation, transparent optics from UV to IR (0.2–5.5 µm), immunity to chemical
corrosion and impact-resistant armour of a very high hardness of 16 GPa. Transparent
nanostructured MgAl2 O4 ceramic with grain size of ~40 nm has a hardness of 31.7 GPa
and Young’s modulus 314 GPa under load that is twice that of large grained ~100–200 µm
MgAl2 O4 ceramics, consistent with the Hall–Petch relationship [21]. The addition of Y2 O3
to MgAl2 O4 grains tailors transparency to the infrared spectrum 0.2–0.6 µm [22]. As well
as enhancing optical transparency, the addition of dopants enhances physical properties
of strength and toughness by limiting grain boundary growth. The transparent MgAl2 O4
ceramic exhibits enhanced fracture toughness when doped with 500 ppm of large ionic
radii Ca and Y, where Y segregates around grain boundaries of Al and Ca segregate around
grain boundaries around Mg [23]. High purity α-alumina may be doped with yttrium to
segregate at grain boundaries to prevent grain growth and sintered at 1450 ◦ C [24]. Similarly,
yttrium-doping migrates to grain boundaries of transparent ZnAl2 O4 ceramic, suppressing
grain growth [25]. Ca is readily available from lunar anorthite but Y is more challenging
to extract from lunar KREEP minerals requiring a suite of reagents. Rare earth element
extraction from rare earth minerals requires dissolution in (NH4 )2 SO4 electrolyte solution
to beneficiate from the low-grade ore. Thence, treatment with ammonium bicarbonate
(CO2 + NH3 + H2 O → (NH4 )HCO3 ) acts as a precipitant which is then burned to yield
the rare earth elements. These reagents require N sources which would be imported from

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

4 of 23

Earth. These then must be separated under the constraint that they have similar physical
and chemical properties.

3. Circular Lunar Industrial Ecology
A circular economy for terrestrial industry is premised on several properties that
underlie the lunar industrial ecology: (i) maximum efficiency of mining, processing and
production; (ii) recycling of waste to reduce pollution; and (iii) refurbishment and repair of
products to extend their useful lifetime. Energy efficiency is sacrificed in favour of material
closure through recycling or reuse. We have adopted the same philosophy for the lunar
industrial ecology [13]. The guide for lunar resources is reflected in the Cheng’E-5 samples,
suggesting bulk abundance of SiO2 (44.9%), Al2 O3 (17.5%), FeO (12.2%), CaO (12.1%), MgO
(8.8%), TiO2 (2.5%), Na2 O (0.44%), Cr2 O3 (0.27%) and K2 O (0.11%) [26], though they do
not occur in pure oxide form. We limited ourselves to extracting only metals that exceed
1% average concentration, though they exhibit higher concentrations in the commonest
four lunar minerals: pyroxene, anorthite, orthoclase and ilmenite. Although there are
only a handful of common rock-forming lunar minerals [27], they may be supplemented
by iron–nickel asteroid material from impactors [28]. Our lunar industrial architecture
emphasised industrial production capacity rather than lunar base infrastructure (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Lunar production architecture showing regolith acquisition by rover fleet, comminution,
beneficiation, electrochemical processing and 3D printing facilities, supported by energy charging
stations and transportation.

Our lunar industrial ecology was premised on such resources, and we restricted
ourselves to building with lunar resources but permitted the import of reagents from Earth
that are recycled but not consumed (Figure 2).
We can map the availability of processed lunar resources to the material functional
requirements (demandite) of a spacecraft (Figure 3).

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

5 of 23

Figure 2. Cont.

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

6 of 23

Figure 2. Lunar industrial ecology that converts raw lunar and asteroidal resources into final
functional materials—inputs are on the left and applications are on the right (only a few feedback
loops are shown).
Functionality (mass fraction)
Tensile structures (25%)

Lunar-Derived Material
Wrought iron
Aluminium
Compressive structures (+50%) Cast iron
Regolith + binder
Elastic structures (trace)
Steel springs/flexures
Silicone elastomers
Hard structures (3%)
Alumina
Thermal conductor straps (1%) Fernico (e.g. kovar)
Nickel
Aluminum
Thermal radiators (3%)
Aluminium
Thermal insulation (3%)
Glass (SiO2 fibre)
Ceramics such as SiO2
High thermal tolerance (4%)
Tungsten
Alumina
Electrical conduction wire (7%) Aluminium
Fernico (e.g. kovar)
Nickel
Electrical insulation (1%)
Glass fibre
Ceramics (SiO2, Al2O3and
TiO2)
Silicone plastics
Silicon steel for motors
Active electronics devices
Kovar
(vacuum tubes) (12%)
Nickel
Tungsten
Fused silica glass

Magnetic materials for
actuators (5%)
Sensory transducers (5%)

Optical structures (11%)

Lubricants (trace)
Power system (20%)

Combustible fuels (+250%)

Ferrite
Silicon steel
Permalloy
Resistance wire
Quartz
Selenium
Polished
nickel/aluminium
Fused silica glass lenses
Silicone oils
Water
Fresnel lens + thermionic
conversion
Flywheels
Oxygen
Hydrogen

Figure 3. Lunar resources mapped to spacecraft functions—percentages refer to the proportion of
a generic dry spacecraft, with excesses indicated for launch propellant to the Gateway and lunar
habitat compressive structure.

We focussed primarily on the core of the lunar industrial ecology—the processing of
the lunar highlands mineral anorthite. We adopted a geomimetic approach—geomimetics
involves inspiration from the synthesis of natural materials through geological processes,
such as hydrothermal vent processes at a high temperature and pressure [29]. We have

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

7 of 23

exploited a geomimetic technique inspired by geochemical weathering by weak carbonic
acid, such as the dissolution of plagioclase feldspar into kaolinite and calcite [30]:
CaAl2 Si2 O8 + H2 CO3 + ½O2 → CaCO3 + Al2 Si2 O5 (OH)4
Kaolinite may be converted into gibbsite via hydrolysis:
Al2 Si2 O5 (OH)4 + 5H2 O → 2Al(OH)3 +2H4 SiO4
From silicic acid, silica may be precipitated. We adopted HCl acid leaching on anorthite
(and other lunar minerals) as our “artificial weathering”. The first stage yielded calcium
chloride and precipitated silica from silicic acid:
CaAl2 SiO8 + 8HCl + 2H2 O → CaCl2 + 2AlCl3 ·6H2 O + 2SiO2
Hydrous aluminium chloride decomposed into aluminium hydroxide at 100 ◦ C with
HCl partially recycled:
2AlCl3 ·6H2 O → 2Al(OH)3 + 6HCl + 9H2 O
Decomposition into alumina occurred at 400 ◦ C:
2Al(OH)3 → Al2 O3 + 3H2 O
We have demonstrated this process for the production of calcium chloride, alumina
and silica from lunar highland simulant (LHS-1) that is dominantly anorthite [31], i.e.,
we have utilised 100% of the anorthite mineral. Calcium chloride is feedstock as CaCl2
electrolyte for molten salt electrolysis [32]. Molten salt electrolysis requires much lower
temperatures at 800–1000 ◦ C than molten regolith electrolysis at 1650 ◦ C. We have successfully demonstrated the reduction of alumina into 95% pure aluminium metal using molten
salt electrolysis [33].
Our concern here is with the ceramics we have produced: alumina and silica. Alumina
and silica are applied to situations where high wear resistance, high corrosion resistance,
high electrical resistance and high thermal stability are required. We shall illustrate the
potential of these two materials in more exotic applications. The float glass technique
involves spreading a layer of molten glass onto a bed of molten metal. Fused silica or quartz
glass SiO2 , although it has a high melting temperature, is chemically inert. The typical
additives of Na2 CO3 and CaCO3 for sodalime glass, for reduced melting temperature and
for hardening, respectively, or B2 O3 for borosilicate glass of low thermal expansion, are
not feasible on the Moon due to the paucity of Na and B but Al2 O3 additives are feasible
for aluminosilicate glass, for high heat tolerance. Glass may be strengthened to reduce
its shatterability by heating to a high temperature and cooling it rapidly so the exterior
cools faster than the interior. The temperature gradient ensures that the outer surface is in
compression while the inner core is in tension (tempering). We do not consider electronics
fabrication of Si semiconductors on the Moon to be feasible in the near-term [34]. There
are other uses for silica. Silica aerogels may be manufactured from waterglass (sodium
silicate) solution, which is acidified into silicic acid followed by gelation using a NH4 OH
catalyst and then dried under special conditions [35]. They have multiple uses including
high-performance thermal insulation.
It has been suggested that 20–25 m diameter heatshields of mass 40 tonnes for Earth reentry at temperatures ~3000 ◦ C may be fabricated on the Moon from sintered lunar silicates
for the delivery of cargo [36]. Silica extracted from anorthite provides a superior material

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

8 of 23

for refractory heat shield tiles as used on the Space Shuttle. However, their adhesion was
substandard. A 5:1 mixture of Al2 O3 :SiO2 sintered at 1500 ◦ C with a liquid aluminium
dihydrogen phosphate (Al(H2 PO4 )3 ·xH2 O) binder produces a high shear strength adhesive
with a high temperature tolerance [37] that may be suitable. However, this is only feasible
if we have access to phosphorus from KREEP (potassium rare earth elements phosphorus)
basalt minerals on the Moon which are localised to the Procellarum region. We shall assume
that this will be a possible scenario once lunar industrialisation has proceeded to maturity.
HCl “artificial weathering” is a general technique for yielding useful ceramics from
lunar minerals. It may be applied to lunar forsterite to yield the ceramic, magnesia:
Mg2 SiO4 + 4HCl + 4H2 O→ 2MgCl2 + 2H4 SiO4
MgCl2 +2 NaOH → Mg(OH)2 + 2NaCl
Mg(OH)2 → MgO + H2 O
The mare mineral ilmenite may be reduced in the presence of hydrogen at 1000 ◦ C to
yield the ceramic rutile: FeTiO3 + H2 → Fe + TiO2 + H2 O. Typically, the molten Fe metal is
tapped at 1600 ◦ C (liquation) and the water is electrolysed to recycle hydrogen and recover
oxygen, leaving rutile. HCl “artificial weathering” may also be applied to lunar orthoclase
as a source of kaolinite clay (Al2 Si2 O5 (OH)4 ) via illite clay (KAl3 Si3 O10 (OH)2 ):
3KAlSi3 O8 + 2HCl + 12H2 O → KAl3 Si3 O10 (OH)2 + 6H4 SiO4 + 2KCl
2KAl3 Si3 O10 (OH)2 + 2HCl + 3H2 O → 3Al2 Si2 O5 (OH)4 + 2KCl
Similarly, lunar pyroxene such as augite may be artificially weathered to yield montmorillonite clay:
Ca(Fe,Al)Si2 O6 + HCl + H2 O → Ca0.33 (Al)2 (Si4 O10 )(OH)2 ·nH2 O + H4 SiO4 + CaCl2 + Fe(OH)3
In fact, acid weathering of pyroxenes at pH~3–4 proceeds more rapidly than that of
feldspar, so basalt is enriched in feldspar on Mars [38]. Montmorillonite is an expanding
clay, unlike illite and kaolinite, and is the primary ingredient in bentonite: (i) viscous agent
in drilling mud; (ii) binder in sand casting—green sand is sand mixed with bentonite clay
and water; (iii) absorbent (montmorillonite and kaolinite) in Fuller’s earth as a cleaning
agent; and (iv) feldspar and kaolinite may be supplemented by bentonite to form pottery.
We shall focus on the processing of alumina, silica, magnesia and rutile and exploitation
of clays as the ceramic resources available on the Moon. In doing so, we emphasise the
multitude of useful properties these ceramics possess that make them so useful on the
Moon as a complement to metals. Ceramics are often deployed in conjunction with metals.
For example, lunar regolith simulant has been deployed for sand-casting and permanent
mould-casting of metal parts such as aluminium [39]. Ceramics also have highly functional
applications, e.g., Mg2 Si is a thermoelectric ceramic which can be manufactured from lunar
resources. Ball-milled Mg2 Si fine-powder ~2–3 µm blended with an oxygen-free polymer
(e.g., polyvinylidene difluoride) and dissolved in a dimethylformadine solution forms a
thermoelectric paste which may be 3D printed into any shape and sintered at <400 ◦ C
limited by Mg2 Si thermal stability [40]. This requires the use of polymer.

4. Thermal Sintering of Lunar-Derived Ceramics
The most significant problem with the processing of ceramics is their hardness and
brittleness at room temperature (an exception being Si3 N4 which is plastic at room temperature under compressive loading [41]). Ceramics are typically formed through moulding,

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

9 of 23

casting and machining but 3D printing offers an alternative mode of manufacturing. Subtractive processing of ceramics is commonly accomplished through water jets pressurised
to 300–600 MPa and laden with an abrasive such as alumina, which can implement cutting, drilling, shock peening and surface structuring. For constructive processing, dry
ball milling is the approach for processing single ceramic powders or mixing powders for
composites. Thermal sintering involves bonding of particles at ¼–¾ of the melting point.
For ceramics, thermal sintering requires sintering temperature from 1000 to 2000 ◦ C range.
Reducing such temperatures to 1150 ◦ C requires reducing particle sizes to ~10–100 nm by
milling using grinding balls <1 mm in diameter and using additives such as <0.2% CaO
and SiO2 to inhibit grain growth [42]. Selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/M) cannot be
employed for direct ceramic melting because of their high melting points, so a polymer,
metal or glass binder of lower melting point is required to bind the ceramic particles. One
of the chief challenges to direct thermal sintering is the thermal gradients introduced with
generate cracks and brittleness. The chief advantage of direct thermal sintering on the
Moon is that it requires no reagents and direct solar energy may be concentrated to high
temperatures using Fresnel lenses [5].
To obviate high temperature >1000 ◦ C ceramic processing, there are alternative approaches that may be exploited at a lower temperature, e.g., hydrothermal sintering at high
pressure for densification, which requires aqueous solution [43]. Hot pressing under high
temperature and pressure may be used to sinter particles into a 3D part with homogeneous
microstructure. Artificial lithification is a hydrothermal press that compacts loose particles
of anhydrous cement at 250 ◦ C and 345 MPa with water into sedimentary rock [44]. Application to crystalline quartz or silica gel with aqueous NaOH solution to improve aqueous
dissolution/precipitation reduces the required pressure to 20 MPa [45]. Hydrothermal
hot pressing has been demonstrated for alumina, geopolymers, glasses, silica, titania and
kaolinite clays. Subjection of nanosized alumina powder with silica gel to 4.5–5.0 GPa at
room temperature yielded densified alumina and silica with a hardness of 5.7 GPa and
4.0 GPa, respectively [43]. Cold sintering involves lower applied pressures < 1 GPa and
modestly elevated temperatures <350 ◦ C by adding aqueous NaOH solution for lubrication
of nanosized ceramic powders as a supersaturated solution, but this has yet to be demonstrated for alumina, silica or magnesia. Hence, hot hydrothermal synthesis under high
pressure appears to be a viable approach to the densification of ceramics on the Moon.
One of the chief challenges to machining ceramics is their hardness and brittleness, so
a major consideration is the introduction of durability to ceramics. Itacolumite sandstone is
a highly flexible rock characterised by angular grain boundary microcracks that may be
emulated by sintered aluminium titanate (Al2 TiO5 ) powder [46]. Flexibility with flexural
strength of 13 MPa is enhanced by a higher sintering temperature and sintering time with
optimal values of 1550 ◦ C and 12 h, respectively. Given the availability of TiO2 on the Moon
through hydrogen reduction of lunar ilmenite, this represents an unexplored material
option for manufacturing aluminium titanate. Ceramic foams can utilise the superelasticity
of alumina Al2 O3 dispersed with 30% magnesia MgO, which suppresses grain growth
of alumina [47]. Although the ductility of MgO-dispersed alumina is inferior to that of
3% yttria-stabilised zirconia, the former can be manufactured from lunar resources and
expanded into dense shells. This is unexplored. Ceramic superplasticity occurs in some
fine-grained ceramics (ZrO2 , Si3 N4 and SiC) at a high temperature ~1500 ◦ C through grain
boundary sliding of intergranular glass phases [48]. This requires a grain size of <1 µm
at a high temperature [49]. The application of an electric field can reduce the viscosity of
such glass phases, making the ceramic more plastic [50]. Both these approaches of high
temperature and applied electric fields are impractical. Borrowing dislocations in ceramics
introduces metals with ceramic through sintering to permit dislocations at metal–ceramic

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

10 of 23

interfaces to enhance ceramic plasticity, e.g., Mo metal applied to La2 O3 ceramic [51].
Sintered porous Si3 N4 structures can be infiltrated by molten 6061 Al alloy under high
pressure to enhance their fracture toughness [52]. Indeed, the addition of 10% Fe to lunar
regolith simulant improved the density of thermally sintering blocks at 1035 ◦ C by reducing
cracks, yielding a compressive strength of 150 MPa and tensile strength of 20 MPa [53].
Ceramic matrix composites comprise a ceramic matrix impregnated with glass or
metal fibres ~10−3 mm to impart non-brittleness. Alumina has high hardness, resistance to
corrosion and wear and high thermal conductivity. Alumina particles may be employed as
a reinforcement in aluminium metal composites, with optimal stress/strain properties of
the composite favoured by small particle size of <10 µm and a higher sintering temperature
at 600 ◦ C over a 60 min sintering time [54]. An 80% alumina matrix with a uniform
distribution of 20% nickel–iron superalloy steel particles may be fabricated using laser
powder bed fusion at 1370 ◦ C [55]. It exhibited porosity even after thermal sintering,
due to poor adhesion between steel and alumina and insufficient melting of alumina.
Polymer impregnation improved the compressive strength from 56 to 120 MPa. Similarly,
digital light processing followed by spark plasma sintering at 1050 ◦ C under 50 MPa
pressure to remove a polymer binder has demonstrated the manufacture of fully dense
functional grading of metal powder-regolith material [56]. A variation on UV-curable 3D
printing involves 25–55% ZrO2 nanoparticles dispersed in a UV-curable resin as a binder
extruded into layers, subsequently cured using a UV laser, heated to 600 ◦ C to remove the
resin and sintered at 1450 ◦ C [57]. NanoSiO2 particle reinforcement may be incorporated
into composites to extend their mechanical properties [58]. Bioinspired organic-inorganic
materials offer high thermal stability with plastic mouldability, e.g., ceramic CaCO3 with
organic thioctic acid (TA) polymerised through S-S bonds, formed by adding CaCO3 to
an ethanol solution of TA [59]. Similarly, CaCO3 nanoparticles may be crosslinked with
polyacrylic acid to form a hydrogel which is stretchable, shapeable and self-healable [60].
Unfortunately, these materials require organic constituents.

5. Three-Dimensional Printing of Lunar-Derived Ceramics
Traditionally, ceramic parts are manufactured by the casting of slurries in moulds that
are then cured and sintered, but such parts cannot assume complex geometries. ThreeDimensional printing of ceramics may be accomplished through fused deposition modelling (FDM), selective laser sintering (SLS), stereolithography (SLA), direct ink writing
(DIW) and binder jetting [61]. FDM is an extrusion technique that prints from a ceramic
powder-impregnated thermoplastic filament that is melted and extruded. The thermoplastic is typically PLA or ABS, but other higher performance polymers are possible, such as
PEEK. PLA is notable because it can be derived from corn starch. Binder jetting is similar,
in that powdered ceramic is sprayed with polymer but the binder is removed through
polymer debonding at 280–650 ◦ C, followed by thermal sintering at 1400–1500 ◦ C [62].
Al2 O3 is commonly printed with polymer and sintered in this way. A broad distribution of
Al2 O3 particle sizes yields higher densities and reduced shrinkage on sintering [63]. The
use of such additives is common in FDM, but the quality of the parts printed is limited
and unsuited to high performance applications such as high temperatures, as the matrix
does not permit exploitation of the ceramics. Fibre-reinforced composites comprising
high-elasticity fibres within a ceramic matrix such as alumina or silica compensate for
brittleness in ceramics whilst retaining their high strength-to-weight ratio and resistance to
corrosion and high temperature. Most commonly, the fibre material is SiC or graphite, but
silica and alumina may be employed as fibres. Additive manufacturing of such composites
favours the adoption of short fibres over continuous fibres, where 3D printing of the preformed composite is printed, followed by debinding and sintering [64]. As with ceramic 3D

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

11 of 23

printing, 3D printing may be through SLA, FDM, BJ, DIW or SLS. The adoption of ceramic
fibres coated with nanophase iron permits the magnetic alignment of the fibres prior to
SLA curing of polymer matrix composites (magnetic 3D printing) [65]. However, there
remain challenges with poor bonding at fibre–matrix interfaces compared with traditional
composite manufacturing.
Terrestrially, the most promising and versatile mode of 3D printing of ceramics is
direct ink writing (DIW) or robocasting due to the wide range of inks [66]. DIW involves
the extrusion of a non-Newtonian (shear-thinning) fluid polymer binder loaded with
powder at a high density of >50%, such as a colloidal paste, to print 3D parts following
sintering. The ink is designed with a yield stress described by the Herschel–Bulkley model:
.n
.
τ = τγ + K γ where τ = applied shear stress, τγ = yield stress, γ = shear rate, K = viscosity,
n = degree of shear thinning (n = 1 for Newtonian fluids). During extrusion, shear-thinning
is necessary, i.e., a decline in viscosity at higher shear rates to prevent clogging. Beyond
.n
τγ , shear thinning is described by a power law, τ = K γ . The 10–50 µm powder may be
metal, polymer or ceramic but the binder is an organic polymer with additives. Typical
polymers are much more complex than FDM polymers and include formaldehyde-phenolurea, polycarboxylic acid, polyethylene glycol or polyvinyl acetate. For example, the
hydrogel Pluronic F-127 comprises a 2:1 mix of polyethylene oxide and polypropylene
oxide to provide both hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties. The paste must also include
additives such as surfactants and dispersants to disperse the particles and prevent particle
aggregation such as stearic acid [67]. After deposition, shape retention requires viscosity
to increase as shear decreases. Thermal debinding at 200–600 ◦ C removes the binder and
must be slow to prevent crack formation, followed by thermal sintering at 1200–2000 ◦ C,
which generally yields 10–20% part shrinkage. Ceramic powder—silica, basalt, etc.—must
be highly loaded into the slurry to reduce shrinkage after sintering. Ceramic powder
comprises ~40–50% suspensions in the polymer fluid (inks) that are extruded as filaments
flowing with decreased viscosity at increased shear [68]. The loading of solid powders
imposes the need for larger nozzles than inkjet printing ~400–800 µm; this is because inkjet
adopts low ceramic loading (<30%) in suspension for low-viscosity ink compared with
high ceramic loading (<60%) for high-viscosity pastes for extrusion or SLA [69]. Inkjet
printing is suited to ceramic nanoparticle suspensions in an ink characterised by an inverse
Ohnesorge number of 1–10, but only simple structures can be printed in this way. Alumina
is an ideal ceramic with high hardness, high compressive strength and resistance to both
corrosion and wear that is also thermally and chemically stable at sintering temperatures.
Ideal alumina loading is 53–56% with 2% Al metal to minimise shrinkage [70]. Sintering
at 1550 ◦ C yields ceramic parts of Al2 O3 with 98% density. The addition of 3–7% carbon
nanotubes imparts electrical conductivity to non-conducting alumina. A loading of 70%
regolith simulant powder may be mixed with 30% polylactic-co-glycolic acid and other
additives such as dichloromethane to form an ink that may be 3D printed into rubber-like
structures with E = 1.8–13 MPa and 250% strain [71]. Although monomers glycolic acid
and lactic acid are derivable from urine, the additives are not so readily manufactured from
lunar resources. Multi-material 3D printing may be implemented by DIW through the
extrusion of different inks with different functional properties [72]. The delivery of multiple
composite inks may be through a single paste cartridge or multiple cartridges. Complex
parts may be manufactured by DIW, such as gears, electrical components and sensors.
Carbon nanotube or graphene in inks can form carbon networks in silicone elastomer
matrices whose conductivity responds to pressure and/or temperature.
All these approaches to 3D printing ceramics and/or composites require the use of
polymer binders which present major challenges for deployment on the Moon. However,

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

12 of 23

even if carbon sources can be found, the use of DIW is not feasible because it requires
careful tailoring of inks which require an Earth-based infrastructure to realise.

6. Problem of Polymers
Carbon is scarce on the Moon, at ~120 ppm embedded in regolith by solar wind
impregnation. There are other possible options. It is expected that concentrated asteroidal resources have been deposited into the Moon’s surface by impacts [73,74]. A 1 km
diameter carbonaceous chondrite striking the Moon at speeds ≤ 10 km/s and impact
angles ≤ 15◦ favour 85% survivability of C-rich (~109 –1010 kg) and N-rich (~108 –109 kg)
solids ~20–30 km downrange of the impact site over a 60 km2 area within <10 m of the
surface [75]. Such impacts at <15◦ and <10 km/s by C-type asteroids are rare (~5 impacts in
the last 3 By) but still yield greater C and N concentrations than solar wind impregnation of
a typical permanently shadowed crater with ~6 × 105 –6 × 108 kg C and N equally. Smaller
impactors ~0.1 km would be more common ~500 delivering ~6 × 102 –6 × 105 kg C and
N equally for each impactor. They may present themselves through their phyllosilicate
signature. The identification of graphite in Apollo 12 and Apollo 17 samples provides
evidence of the survival of carbonaceous asteroid impacts favoured by porosity, obliquity
and low velocity [76]. The Yutu-2 rover of Chang’e 4 has discovered a glassy material
in a small 2 m diameter crater with a high 47% concentration of carbonaceous chondrite
remnant from an impactor [77]. Even complex organic matter has been associated with
pyroclastic beads recovered from Shorty crater by Apollo 17, derived from micrometeoritic
kerogen [78]. So asteroid material may exist on the Moon but, if not, asteroids may be
manoeuvred into lunar orbit and undergo a controlled descent to the lunar surface [79].
Once the asteroid has soft-landed on the Moon, it may be subject to processing under the
Moon’s gravity field. The latter scenario of asteroid manoeuvring is not technologically
feasible in the near-term. Otherwise, the use of polymers requires its transport from Earth,
which imposes a high transport burden. We examine two scenarios: (i) the recovery of
diffuse solar-wind-implanted carbon volatiles so small quantities are available; and (ii) the
discovery of an asteroid-delivered carbon source presenting copious amounts of carbon,
permitting the manufacture of simple polymers.
In case (i), we have a restricted supply of carbon that must be husbanded and consumed frugally—one possibility is to synthesise polymers that use carbon only in its side
chains but not its backbone. Inorganic silicone polymers are dominated by siloxanes with
Si-O-Si backbones such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), as well as related materials such
as polysilazanes with Si–N–Si backbones. However, N is rarer than C on the Moon, ruling
out the latter. Siloxanes (silicones) may be manufactured from syngas through the Rochow
process via methanol [80]. Silicone can act as a binder for ceramic powders and a source of
silica in the sintered ceramic part. Silicones have high temperature tolerance ~300 ◦ C and
high UV-resistance compared with C–C bond polymers. Preceramic polymers permit 3D
printing of the polymer into complex parts, which is then converted into a ceramic through
pyrolysis (ceramisation) at 600–1000 ◦ C in an N2 atmosphere which decomposes the organic component [81]. Silicone-based pre-ceramic polymer precursors can be 3D printed
as extruded polymer and then cured into a SiOC ceramic by vacuum pyrolysis at 1100 ◦ C
after deposition. The printed SiOC has a compressive strength of 240 MPa. Pyrolysis in
O2 yields the formation of silicate ceramics by eliminating the carbon required for carbide
formation. Silicones reduce the consumption of carbon but nevertheless do consume carbon, requiring recovery of CO/CO2 during pyrolysis for recycling. Metallosiloxanes such
as titanosiloxanes are silicones with metals in the polymer backbone Ti-O-Si, formed from
TiO2 at temperatures >900 ◦ C [82]. They can act as zeolites. Aluminosiloxanes are inorganic
polymers based on Al-Si-O backbone but are manufactured from complex precursors [83].

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

13 of 23

The aluminosiloxane Al(O’Pr),(OSiMe3 ) may be an organic precursor of 92Al2 O3 -8SiO2
ceramic [84]. However, complex precursors rule out aluminosiloxanes. Silicones and
titanosilicones may be manufacturable in small quantities for specialist applications.
In case (ii), we can assume that a plentiful carbon source has been discovered and that
we can synthesise simple plastics. The initial reactions for polymer synthesis from syngas
to methanol are the same as for the Rochow process. We focus on synthesising transparent
PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate) which has versatility of use, including as a tough acrylic
glass, as a resist in electron beam lithography and, most relevant here, as transparent liquid
MMA monomers that can act as UV photopolymers in SLA. Although manufacture of both
PMMA and its photoinitiator require a source of N, we expect such to be available with
C from carbonaceous chondrite deposits. Syngas may be converted to methanol using an
alumina catalyst at 200–300 ◦ C and 50–100 bar:
CO + 2H2 → CH3 OH
Methanol is converted to acetone through dehydrogenation:
2CH3 OH → CH3 COCH3 + H2 O + H2
Acetone reacts with HCN to yield acetone cyanohydrin (ACH):
CH3 COCH3 + HCN → (CH3 )2 C(OH)CN
ACH is converted to transparent liquid MMA using H2 SO4 at 80–120 ◦ C:
(CH3 )2 C(OH)CN + CH3 OH + H2 SO4 → CH2 =C(CH3 )COOCH3 + NH4 HSO4
UV-initiated (benzoin initiator) polymerisation of MMA at 25–60 ◦ C yields PMMA:
–[CH2 –C(CH3 )(COOCH3 )–]n .
MMA monomer acts as a UV photopolymer by hardening into PMMA in the presence
of the photoinitiator benzoin. Benzoin synthesis begins with conversion of methanol-tobenzene in the presence of a zeolite catalyst at 400–500 ◦ C:
6CH3 OH → C6 H6 + 6H2 O
Zeolites are tetrahedral MO4 units where M=Si or Al that act as selective catalysts.
Benzene is converted to benzaldehyde through the Gattermann-Koch reaction using an
AlCl3 catalyst:
C6 H6 + CO + HCl → C6 H5 CHO
Benzoin condensation proceeds using an HCN catalyst:
2C6 H5 CHO → C6 H5 CH(OH)COC6 H5
Hence, we have the UV-photopolymer PMMA with its benzoin photoinitiator to permit the use of SLA. Refractory ceramic powder ~µm size such as silica or alumina may
be dispersed at 50–65% by volume in a UV acrylate photopolymer (such as MMA) with
photoinitiator (such as benzoin) and subjected to 150–200 µm layered stereolithography by
UV laser [85]. The curing depth reachable by the UV laser is d ∝ 1 2 where n = refractive
∆n
index difference between ceramic and solution derived from the Beer–Lambert law. The
photopolymer binder is removed to reveal the ceramic part. Reduced gravity or micro-

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

14 of 23

gravity imposes criticality to the rheological properties of the ceramic slurry of 50% Al2 O3
particles in a UV-curable glycol dimethylacrylate resin with a photoinitiator [86]. It behaves
as a Bingham fluid in which low shear stress yields high solid-like viscosity, but there is a
threshold shear stress that acts as a plastic yield stress. The viscoelasticity of the fluid is
increased into a paste by 0.5% cellulose—cellulose is a single additive that can act as dispersant, plasticiser and coagulant that is derivable from vegetation. UV photopolymerisation
builds the part layer-by-layer with a layer resolution of 50–100 µm. An 86% dense ceramic
results after sintering at 1500 ◦ C.
As we can see, the manufacture of polymers on the Moon would be a boon in opening
up 3D printing techniques. Indeed, PMMA in particular exhibits high utility in opening
SLA as a 3D printing technique. However, we cannot assume that these resources will be
available so we must contend with a paucity of techniques for processing ceramics. The
desirability for thermoplastic-type material properties for extrusion-based 3D printing has
motivated interest in metallic glasses. Bulk metallic glasses such as Zr44 Ti11 Cu10 Ni10 Be25
are supercooled liquid metals that soften on heating like thermoplastics suitable for FDMbased extrusion by heating to 460 ◦ C [87]. The printing temperature T determines the
incubation time t before recrystallisation according to the Arrhenius equation: t = t0 e− E/RT
where t0 = time constant, E = activation energy, R = universal gas constant, T = annealing
temperature. Deposition may proceed at a rate of 5 cm/s until the metallic glass recrystallises into hard metal within 100 s. Bulk metallic glass La60 Ni15 Al25 has been suggested as
a recyclable in-space material [88] but this is impractical. Furthermore, bulk metal glasses
cannot be readily sourced and alloyed from lunar resources.
The most promising approach to 3D printing ceramics is peculiar to alumina
through an inorganic ink for direct ink writing, comprising 58% alumina (Al2 O3 ) particles ~80–200 nm within aluminium dihydrogen phosphate (Al(H2 PO4 )3 —AP) matrix as a
rheological modifier [89]. AP may be synthesised by reacting H3 PO4 with Al(OH)3 . The
inorganic AP binder reduces shrinkage during sintering of the 3D printed alumina ceramic
at 1250 ◦ C for maximum bending strength. Additives reduce the sintering temperature
from the Al2 O3 sintering temperature of 1700–1800 ◦ C. TheTiO2 additive dissolves in Al2 O3
while the CuO additive becomes liquid to fill pores. If the CuO additive can be omitted, this
represents a highly suitable ink for use on the Moon that is not reliant on carbon polymers.

7. Lunar-Derived Clays
Here, we adopt clays as a ceramic material with plastic properties to avoid the use of
polymers. Clays are hydrated aluminosilicates with ratios of SiO2 /Al2 O3 of (2.0–5.0):1.0.
Kaolinite clay (2SiO2 ·Al2 O3 ·2H2 O) with a water-to-clay ratio of ~0.60 may be 3D printed
by DIW through 1.0–1.6 mm diameter nozzles, cured at room temperature for 24 h and
sintered at 1100–1200 ◦ C for several hours to yield porcelain with a compressive strength
of 20–50 MPa [90]. To prevent clogging of nozzles, clay may be enriched with additives;
although sodium polyacrylate is a superior deflocculant to sodium silicate [65], the latter
is incorporated into the lunar industrial ecology. The use of embedded temperature
and relative humidity sensors for feedback yields strengths of 70 MPa for fired clay and
90 MPa for non-fired clay [91]. Layer-wise slurry deposition uses a slurry feedstock of
regolith mixed with 40% hydrated montmorillonite clay, deposited via a blade in 25–100 µm
layers [92]. During drying, water from the current layer is drawn into the substrate layer
by capillary forces to create a dry high-density powder bed. Either binder jetting of
polymer fluid or laser sintering of powder layer may be adopted. The completed 3D part
is then sintered at 1130 ◦ C in a furnace. Martian salts MgSO4 binding with SiO2 to form
forsterite Mg2 SiO4 or enstatite Mg2 Si2 O6 could strengthen the part if Martian resources

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

15 of 23

were available. A lunar version could exploit Sorel cement as a binder at the cost of
consuming Cl import from Earth reacting with lunar olivine:
3MgO + MgCl2 + 11H2 O → 3Mg(OH)2 ·MgCl2 ·8H2 O
Bamboo fibre reinforcement may be added [93], a highly versatile material suited to a
lunar agricultural facility [7].
Geopolymer is an alkali-activated cement such as the clay-like aluminosilicate
metakaolin activated by sodium silicate (waterglass). They form a 3D network of covalent Si-O–Al bonds Mn {-(SiO2 )z -AlO2 }·wH2 O where M = metal cation such as K+ and
Na+ , n = polymerisation degree, z = 1, 2 or 3, w = bound water. Geopolymer may be
constructed from metakaolinite (dehydroxylated kaolinite) comprising 90–95% Al2 O3 and
SiO2, which dissolves in an activating alkali such as NaOH or KOH. Plasticising fillers can
alter the viscoelasticity. These are commonly organics such as sodium carboxymethyl starch
which increases viscosity, but magnesium aluminium silicate is a smectite clay derived from
feldspar that serves the same purpose. Geopolymer may be mixed with aggregates such
as 20% silica sand, which reduces shrinkage. Three-Dimensional printing geopolymers
may be via extrusion of geopolymer paste or geopolymer powders which are activated by
NaOH solution, which gives a higher compression strength than KOH [94]. The Na2 CO3
activation reaction proceeds more slowly, which may be desirable but requires a carbon
source. Curing at high temperature ~100 ◦ C increases mechanical strength. A lunar regolith
simulant-based geopolymer ink, reinforced by carbon fibre/quartz in different patterns,
forms a 3D printed composite to reduce the brittleness of the geopolymer; rectangular
sandwich patterns yielded the highest compressive strengths of 20 MPa and 34 MPa in y
and x directions [95]. Lunar-derived clays offer some of the promise of ceramics, but their
true potential requires marriage with polymers.

8. Non-Clay Minerals and Their Uses
There are other uses for non-clay lunar minerals. On the Moon, olivine forsterite
(Mg2 SiO4 ) may be reacted with quartz (SiO2 ) to form the orthopyroxene enstatite (MgSiO3 ):
Mg2 SiO4 + SiO2 → 2MgSiO3
The hydration of enstatite yields serpentinite (Mg3 Si2 O5 (OH)4 ) and talc (Mg3 Si4 O10
(OH)2 ):
6MgSiO3 + H2 O → Mg3 Si2 O5 (OH)4 + Mg3 Si4 O10 (OH)2
Talc may be employed as a dry lubricant as an alternative to tungsten or molybdenum disulphide [96]. Exploitation of such lunar minerals as ceramic resources has yet to
be explored.

9. Direct Solar Sintering/Melting
We consider, finally, direct thermal processing of ceramic materials including regolith.
A layer of regolith around 2.5 m thick is required for a radiation shield to reduce exposed
radiation to 5 REM. Crucial to the deployment of sintered regolith is compressive strength
for load bearing. Implicit is the desirability of manufacturing equipment from lunar
resources. Solar concentrators are mirrors or lenses that concentrate light according to the
concentrator ratio given by [97]:

C=

Aconc
=
Aspot



4
4
εσ Tspot
− Tamb
S0 ηconc

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

16 of 23

where Tspot = spot temperature = 1800 ◦ C to melt regolith, Tamb = ambient temperature
(270 K) and η conc = concentrator efficiency of 0.85 requiring C~400. Mirrors comprise an
aluminium reflector with a cover of fused silica glass (derived from locally extracted SiO2
or other transparent material such as MgAl2 O4 spinel). Paraboloids may be approximated
by multiple appropriately oriented flat mirrors but with some loss in performance. Fresnel
lenses offer a higher concentration ratio than mirrors given by the following [97]:

C=

n
n amb sinθsun

2

where n = 1.5 for glass, n = 1 for air, θ sun = sun half-angle = 0.275◦ so C = 97,700 compared
to a theoretical C = 45,900 for mirrors. Fresnel lenses comprise fused silica glass with
a submicron structured surface constructed by transparent fused silica glass or spinel.
Sintering increases regolith-effective thermal conductivity, allowing increased sintering
depth by 45% [98]. Solar concentrators generate limited spot size resolution of >10 mm.
Large-scale experiments with a 52 m2 mirror reflecting onto a 147-mirror concentrator
concentrated solar 800 W/m2 onto 4 MW/m2 [99]. Compressive strength of solar layersintered regolith is under 5 MPa which is considered marginal from the minimum required
3 MPa under lunar gravity. Compression strength was enhanced by a higher sintering
temperature and shortening the cooling time between layers by reducing thermal stresses.
Most experiments on sintered regolith simulants also use simulated solar sources (Xe lamps)
to replicate atmosphere-less lunar lighting conditions. The Regolight project deployed
solar sintering using Xe lamps concentrated by a parabolic mirror then oriented by a watercooled flat mirror onto regolith simulant to sinter it layer-by-layer with 100 µm layers into
10 × 20 × 70 mm bricks. They 3D printed interlocking 3D printed tetrahedon bricks and
flat dodecahedron tiles using layers ~2 mm thick but feature resolution was limited to
>14 mm and compressive strength was poor at 2.5 MPa due to irregular delamination and
warping [100–102]. In small-scale experiments using Xe lamps on small regolith samples,
compressive strengths of solar sintered regolith can reach ~150 MPa [103]. Successful
sintering of regolith simulant bricks with a compression strength of 45 MPa has been
achieved through a two-stage process using a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) binder [104]. The
binder was pre-mixed with water, then mixed with regolith simulant and then cast into
cubical blocks using a hydraulic press. The brick was then heated in a furnace at 600 ◦ C
to remove the binder, then at 1150 ◦ C to sinter the regolith. The conclusion is that solar
sintering of regolith is highly restrictive—it has a poor spot size resolution, yet it is limited
to small-scale structures. Successful deployment for large-scale application requires the use
of polymer binders even for bricks.
Our own preliminary experiments confirm these findings. We used two Fresnel lenses
to experiment on the solar melting of LHS-1 highland lunar regolith simulant into glass
(Figure 4).
Exolith LHS-1 lunar highland simulant comprises 74.4% anorthosite, 24.7% basalt,
0.4% ilmenite, 0.3% olivine and 0.2% pyroxene. The small/large Fresnel lens numerical
aperture was 0.3/0.5 with a focal spot diameter of 8 mm/11 mm. Our experiments were
conducted in August in Ottawa. We used the small lens to form melted lines and the large
lens to form melted squares. In printing a line, the sun’s azimuth movement caused the
focus to spread, requiring periodic adjustment to maintain focus on a point for melting
(Figure 5a). The first single layer print exhibited a melt depth of 4.37 mm after 3 min of
concentrated solar exposure. The three-layer print was printed sequentially by brushing
more regolith layers over melted regolith, then melting them, but the final surface was
rougher than the underlying layers due to cloud interference (Figure 5b).

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

17 of 23

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. (a) Small Fresnel lens; (b) Large Fresnel lens.

(a)

(b)
Figure 5. (a) line of melted LHS-1; (b) square samples 1 to 4 of melted LHS-1.

The final square dimensions were 32.3 mm × 30.7 mm × 10.6 mm with each layer
averaging ~3.5 mm (Figure 6).
All samples were compression load tested with squares of approximately the same
dimensions on a substrate of unmelted regolith simulant (Figure 7).
Sample 1 was a three-layer sample, but the tests were performed on single-layered
samples 2–4 to determine the compressive load limits (Table 1).

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

18 of 23

Figure 6. Thickness of samples 1 to 4 of melted LHS-1.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. (a) Compressive load testing apparatus; (b) sample under compression test.
Table 1. Melted sample compressive load limits until cracking.

Sample

Compressive Load Limit (N)

2

239

3

267

4

136 (crack 1)/446 (crack 2)—291 (av)

All the samples cracked into several pieces with a consistent compressive load of
~250 N (including offset tension of 24 N). With a probe cross-section of 110 mm × 29 mm,
this gives a critical compressive pressure of 78 kPa, which is insufficient for adequate load
bearing on the Moon.

10. Conclusions
The complexity of the ink of DIW and its reliance on polymers renders DIW unsuitable
for the Moon even in support of human habitats; organic matter consumed in inks or
binders must be either recycled through a closed loop capability or supplied from Earth.
Although recycling may be plausible for some simple polymers, DIW inks are too complex
to resynthesise. SLA-based methods similarly rely on photopolymers and photoinitiator
polymers, but these are more plausibly manufacturable than DIW inks, though they still

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

19 of 23

require a carbon source. More traditional ceramic processing methods appear more suitable
for lunar application. Sintering ceramics directly using solar concentrators is not reliant
on the manufacture of organic polymers or other complex materials, though there remain
issues regarding brittleness. Furthermore, to manufacture such optical devices from lunar
resources reintroduces polymers. To exploit the full range and versatility of ceramics
derived from lunar resources, carbon sources on the Moon to permit the synthesis of
polymers must be searched for at the highest priority. Silicone polymers are preferred for
deployment on the Moon for their hardiness to radiation. Although hydrocarbon polymers
are susceptible to radiation effects, if used as a binder that is subsequently removed, this
problem does not arise. The potential for lunar-derived ceramics is underexplored in
comparison with lunar-derived metals. Lunar industrialisation will be critically dependent
on the deployment of lunar ceramics, so this requires urgent address.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analysed in this study.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Aidan Chan for performing the solar Fresnel lens tests
on the LHS-1 simulant.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

Wang, Y.; Hao, L.; Li, Y.; Sun, Q.; Sun, M.; Huang, Y.; Li, Z.; Tang, D.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, L. In-situ utilisation of regolith resource and
future exploration of additive manufacturing for lunar/martian habitats: A review. Appl. Clay Sci. 2022, 229, 106673. [CrossRef]
Mueller, R.; Howe, S.; Kochmann, D.; Ali, H.; Anderson, C.; Burgoyne, H.; Chambers, W.; Clinton, R.; De Kestellier, X.; Ebelt, K.;
et al. Automated additive construction (AAC) for Earth and space using in-situ resources. In Proceedings of the Biennial ASCE
Conference on Engineering, Science, Construction & Operations in Challenging Environments (Earth & Space 2016), Reston, VA,
USA, 11–15 April 2016.
Fiske, M.; Ellery, A. On the Development of an ISRU-Based Calcium Sulphoaluminate Concrete for 3D Printed and Cast Lunar Surface
Infrastructure Applications; AIAA SciTech Forum: Orlando, FL, USA, 2025; p. 1863.
Ellery, A. Leveraging in-situ resources for lunar base construction. Can. J. Civ. Eng. 2021, 49, 657–674. [CrossRef]
Ellery, A. Generating and storing power on the Moon using in-situ resources. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2021, 236,
1045–1063. [CrossRef]
Ellery, A. Can we build nuclear-electric propulsion systems from lunar resources? In Space Resources Roundtable; Colorado School
of Mines: Golden, CO, USA, 2025; Available online: https://isruinfo.com/public/index.php?page=srr_25 (accessed on 12 August
2025).
Ellery, A. Supplementing closed ecological life support systems with in-situ resources on the Moon. Life 2021, 11, 770. [CrossRef]
Azami, M.; Kazemi, Z.; Moazen, S.; Dube, M.; Potvin, M.-J.; Skonieczny, K. Comprehensive review of lunar-based manufacturing
and construction. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2024, 150, 101045. [CrossRef]
Zocca, A.; Wilbig, J.; Gunster, J.; Widjaja, P.; Neumann, C.; Clozel, M.; Meyer, A.; Ding, J.; Zhou, Z.; Tian, X. Challenges in the
technology development for additive manufacturing in space. Chin. J. Mech. Eng. Addit. Manuf. Front. 2022, 1, 100018. [CrossRef]
Ellery, A. Challenges of robotic milli-g operations for asteroid mining. In Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference
2024, London, UK, 14–15 November 2024; Arai, K., Ed.; Lecture Notes on Networks & Systems. Springer Nature Switzerland AG:
Cham, Switzerland, 2024; Volume 1157, pp. 45–64.
McKay, D.; Hiken, G.; Basu, A.; Blanford, G.; Simon, S.; Reedy, R.; French, B.; Papike, J. Lunar regolith. In Lunar Sourcebook;
Heiken, G., Vaniman, D., French, B., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1991; pp. 287–356.
Klein, C. Lunar materials: Their mineralogy, petrology and chemistry. Earth Sci. Rev. 1972, 8, 169–204. [CrossRef]
Ellery, A. Sustainable in-situ resource utilisation on the Moon. Planet. Space Sci. 2020, 184, 104870. [CrossRef]
Sodha, G.; Dhingra, D. Novel geological framework to understand the origin and diversity of orthopyroxene, olivine, spinel
(OOS) lithologies on the Moon. Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 2426. [CrossRef]

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
40.

20 of 23

Papike, J.; Taylor, L.; Simon, S. Lunar minerals. In Lunar Sourcebook; Heiken, G., Vaniman, D., French, B., Eds.; Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1991; pp. 121–181.
Crawford, I.; Anand, M.; Barber, S.; Cowley, A.; Crites, S.; Fa, W.; Flahaut, J.; Gaddis, L.; Greenhagen, B.; Haruyama, J.; et al.
Lunar resources. Rev. Mineral. Geochem. 2023, 89, 829–868. [CrossRef]
Reveron, H.; Gutierrez-Campos, D.; Rodriguez, R.; Bonassin, J. Chemical synthesis and thermal evolution of MgAl2O4 spinel
precursor prepared from industrial gibbsite and magnesia powder. Mater. Lett. 2002, 56, 97–101. [CrossRef]
Ewais, E.; Besisa, D.; El-Amir, A.; El-Sheikh, S.; Rayan, D. Optical properties of nanocrystalline magnesium aluminate spinel
synthesised from industrial waste. J. Alloys Compd. 2015, 649, 159–166. [CrossRef]
Lemeshev, D.; Senina, M.; Pedchenko, M.; Boyko, A. Transparent ceramic based on magnesium aluminate spinel for armour. IOP
Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2019, 525, 012081. [CrossRef]
Shi, Z.; Zhao, Q.; Guo, B.; Ji, T.; Wang, H. Review on processing polycrystalline magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl2 O4 ): Sintering
techniques, material properties and machinability. Mater. Des. 2020, 193, 108858. [CrossRef]
Zhang, J.; Lu, T.; Chang, X.; Wei, N.; Qi, J. Unique mechanical properties of nanostructured transparent MgAl2 O4 ceramics.
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2013, 8, 261. [CrossRef]
Mroz, T.; Goldman, L.; Gledhill, A.; Li, D.; Padture, N. Nanostructured infrared-transparent magnesium aluminate spinel with
superior mechanical properties. Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol. 2012, 9, 83–90. [CrossRef]
Campos-Quiros, A.; Zughbi, M.; Kundu, A.; Watanabe, M. Correlation between grain boundary segregation behaviours of calcium
and yttrium and enhanced fracture toughness in magnesium aluminate spinel. J. Mater. Sci. 2025, 60, 1826–1852. [CrossRef]
Voytovych, R.; MacLaren, I.; Gulgun, M.; Cannon, R.; Ruhle, M. Effect of yttrium on densification and grain growth in α-alumina.
Acta Mater. 2002, 50, 3453–3463. [CrossRef]
Xu, P.; Wang, H.; Tu, B.; Gu, H.; Wang, W.; Liu, S.; Ma, C.; Fu, Z. Effect of yttrium-doped grain boundary on sintering behaviour
and properties of transparent ZnAl2 O4 ceramics. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 2024, 44, 6597–6606. [CrossRef]
Hou, Z.; Gong, Q.; Liu, N.; Jiang, B.; Li, J.; Wu, Y.; Huang, J.; Gu, W. Elemental abundances of Moon samples based on statistical
distributions of analytical data. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 360. [CrossRef]
Heiken, G.; Vaniman, D.; French, B. Lunar Sourcebook: A Users Guide to the Moon; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK,
1991; Available online: https://www.lpi.usra.edu/publications/books/lunar_sourcebook/pdf/LunarSourceBook.pdf (accessed
on 12 August 2025).
Ellery, A. Mining asteroid versus mining the Moon—Can you have your cake and eat it? In Space Resources Roundtable; Colorado
School of Mines: Golden, CO, USA, 2025.
Unterclass, M. Geomimetics and extreme biomimetics inspired by hydrothermal systems—What can we learn from nature for
materials synthesis? Biomimetics 2017, 2, 8. [CrossRef]
Lasaga, A.; Soler, J.; Ganor, J.; Burch, T.; Nagy, K. Chemical weathering rate laws and global geochemical cycles. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 1994, 58, 2361–2386. [CrossRef]
Thibodeau, B.; Walls, X.; Ellery, A.; Cousens, B.; Marczenko, K. Extraction of silica and alumina from lunar highland simulant. In
Proceedings of the ASCE Earth & Space Conference 2024, Miami, FL, USA, 15–18 April 2024; p. 6962.
Ellery, A.; Mellor, I.; Wanjara, P.; Conti, M. Metalysis FFC process as a strategic lunar in-situ resource utilisation technology. New
Space J. 2022, 10, 224–238. [CrossRef]
Walls, X.; Ellery, A.; Marczenko, K.; Wanjara, P. Aluminium metal extraction from lunar highland simulant using electrochemistry.
In Proceedings of the ASCE Earth & Space Conference 2024, Miami, FL, USA, 15–18 April 2024. Paper No. 7061.
Ellery, A. Is electronics fabrication feasible on the Moon? In Proceedings of the ASCE Earth & Space Conference 2022, Denver,
CO, USA, 25–28 April 2022; pp. 759–772.
Dorcheh, S.; Abbasi, M. Silica aerogel: Synthesis, properties and characterization. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2008, 199, 10–26.
[CrossRef]
Hogue, M.; Mueller, R.; Sibille, L.; Hintze, P.; Rasky, D. Extraterrestrial regolith derived atmospheric entry heat shields. In
Proceedings of the 15th Biennial ASCE International Conference on Engineering, Science, Construction, and Operations in
Challenging Environments, Orlando, FL, USA, 11–15 April 2016.
Chen, Y.; Wang, X.; Yu, C.; Ding, J.; Deng, C.; Zhu, H. Properties of inorganic high temperature adhesive for high temperature
furnace connection. Ceram. Int. 2019, 45, 8684–8689. [CrossRef]
McAdam, A.; Zolotiv, M.; Sharp, T.; Leshkin, L. Preferential low pH dissolution of pyroxene in plagioclase-pyroxene mixtures:
Implications for martian surface materials. Icarus 2008, 196, 90–96. [CrossRef]
Baasch, J.; Windisch, L.; Koch, F.; Linke, S.; Stoll, E.; Schilde, C. Regolith as substitute mould material for aluminium casting on
the Moon. Acta Astronaut. 2021, 182, 1–12. [CrossRef]
Marques, A.; Miglietta, D.; Gaspar, G.; Baptista, A.; Gaspar, A.; Perdigao, P.; Soares, I.; Bianchi, C.; Sousa, D.; Faustino, M.; et al.
Synthesis of thermoelectric magnesium-silicide pastes for 3D printing, electrospinning and low-pressure spray. Mater. Renew.
Sustain. Energy 2019, 8, 21. [CrossRef]

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.

21 of 23

Frankberg, E. Ceramic that bends instead of shattering. Science 2022, 378, 359–360. [CrossRef]
Kuang, X.; Carotenuto, G.; Nicolais, L. Review of ceramic sintering and suggestions on reducing sintering temperatures. Adv.
Perform. Mater. 1997, 4, 257–274. [CrossRef]
Vakifahmetoglu, C.; Karacasulu, L. Cold sintering of ceramics and glasses: A review. Curr. Opin. Solid. State Mater. Sci. 2020, 24,
100807. [CrossRef]
Yamasaki, N.; Yanagisawa, K.; Nishioka, M.; Kanahara, S. Hydrothermal hot-pressing method: Apparatus and application. J.
Mater. Sci. Lett. 1986, 5, 355–356. [CrossRef]
Yanagisawa, K.; Nishioka, M.; Ioku, K.; Yamasaki, N. Densification of silica gels by hydrothermal hot-pressing. J. Mater. Sci. Lett.
1993, 12, 1073–1075. [CrossRef]
Chen, W.; Shui, A.; Wang, C.; Li, J.; Ma, J.; Tian, W.; Ota, T.; Xi, X. Preparation of aluminium titanate flexible ceramic by solid
phase sintering and its mechanical behaviour. J. Alloys Compd. 2019, 777, 119–126. [CrossRef]
Kishimoto, A.; Obata, M.; Asaoka, H.; Hayashi, H. Fabrication of alumina-based ceramic foams utilising superplasticity. J. Eur.
Ceram. Soc. 2007, 27, 41–45. [CrossRef]
Wakai, F.; Kondo, N.; Shinoda, Y. Ceramics superplasticity. Curr. Opin. Solid. State Mater. Sci. 1999, 4, 461–465. [CrossRef]
Pilling, J.; Payne, J. Superplasticity in Al2O3-ZrO2-Al2TiO5 ceramics. Scr. Metall. Mater. 1995, 32, 1091–1097. [CrossRef]
Shen, Z.; Peng, H.; Nygren, M. Formidable increase in the superplasticity of ceramics in the presence of an electric field. Adv.
Mater. 2003, 15, 1006–1009. [CrossRef]
Dong, L.; Zhang, J.; Li, Z.; Gao, Y.; Wang, M.; Huang, M.; Wang, J.; Chen, K. Borrowed dislocations for ductility in ceramics.
Science 2024, 385, 422–428. [CrossRef]
Peng, L.; Cao, J.; Noda, K.; Han, K. Mechanical properties of ceramic-metal composites by pressure infiltration of metal into
porous ceramics. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2004, 374, 1–9. [CrossRef]
Wan, F.; Zuo, Y.; Pan, Y.; Yu, A.; Qi, J.; Lu, X. Iron-enhanced simulated lunar regolith sintered blocks: Preparation, sintering and
mechanical properties. Constr. Build. Mater. 2024, 439, 137395. [CrossRef]
Rahimian, M.; Ehsani, N.; Parvin, N.; Baharvandi, H. Effect of particle size, sintering temperature and sintering time on the
properties of Al-Al2 O3 composites made by powder metallurgy. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2009, 209, 5387–5393. [CrossRef]
Azami, M.; Siahsarani, A.; Hadian, A.; Kazemi, Z.; Rahmatabadi, D.; Kashani-Bozorg, F.; Abrinia, K. Laser powder bed fusion
of alumina/Fe-Ni ceramic matrix particulate composites impregnated with a polymeric resin. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 2023, 24,
3133–3144. [CrossRef]
Laot, M.; Rich, B.; Cheibas, I.; Fu, J.; Zhu, J.-N.; Popovich, V. Additive manufacturing and spark plasma sintering of lunar regolith
for functionally graded materials. Spool 2021, 8, 7–23.
Faes, M.; Valkenaers, H.; Vogeler, F.; Vleugels, J.; Ferraris, E. Extrusion-based 3D printing of ceramic components. Procedia CIRP
2015, 28, 76–81. [CrossRef]
Ngo, T.; Kashani, A.; Imbalzano, G.; Nguyen, K.; Hui, D. Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of materials, methods,
applications and challenges. Compos. B Eng. 2018, 143, 172–196. [CrossRef]
Fang, W.; Mu, Z.; He, Y.; Kong, K.; Jiang, K.; Tang, R.; Liu, Z. Organic-inorganic covalent-ionic molecules for elastic ceramic
plastic. Nature 2023, 619, 293–299. [CrossRef]
Sun, S.; Mao, L.-B.; Lei, Z.; Yu, S.-H.; Colfen, H. Hydrogels from amorphous calcium carbonate and polyacrylic acid: Bio-inspired
materials for ‘mineral plastic’. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 11765–11769. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wang, Y.; Wu, T.; Huang, G. State-of-the-art research progress and challenge of the printing techniques, potential applications for
advanced ceramic materials 3D printing. Mater. Today Commun. 2024, 40, 110001. [CrossRef]
Clemens, F.; Sarraf, F.; Borzi, A.; Neels, A.; Hadian, A. Material extrusion additive manufacturing of advanced ceramics: Towards
the production of large components. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 2023, 43, 2752–2760. [CrossRef]
Yeh, T.-S.; Sacks, M. Effect of particle size distribution on the sintering of alumina. Commun. Am. Ceram. Soc. 1988, 71, C484–C487.
[CrossRef]
Wang, W.; Zhang, L.; Dong, X.; Wu, J.; Zhou, Q.; Li, S.; Shen, C.; Liu, W.; Wang, G.; He, R. Additive manufacturing of fibre
reinforced ceramic matrix composites: Advances, challenges and prospects. Ceram. Int. 2021, 48, 19542–19556. [CrossRef]
Martin, J.; Fiore, B.; Erb, R. Designing bioinspired composite reinforcement architectures via 3D magnetic printing. Nat. Commun.
2015, 6, 8641. [CrossRef]
Romanczuk-Ruszuk, E.; Sztorch, B.; Pakula, D.; Gabriel, E.; Nowak, K.; Przekop, R. 3D printing ceramics—Materials for direct
extrusion process. Ceramics 2023, 6, 364–385. [CrossRef]
Hao, L.; Tang, D.; Sun, T.; Xiong, W.; Feng, Z.; Evans, K.; Li, Y. Direct ink writing of mineral materials—A review. Int. J. Precis.
Eng. Manuf. Green. Technol. 2021, 8, 665–685. [CrossRef]
Lamnini, S.; Elsaed, H.; Lakhdar, Y.; Baino, F.; Smeacetto, F.; Bernado, E. Robocasting of advanced ceramics: Ink optimization and
protocol to predict the printing parameters—A review. Helyon 2022, 8, e10651. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

88.
89.
90.
91.

92.
93.
94.
95.
96.

22 of 23

Chen, Z.; Li, Z.; Li, J.; Liu, C.; Lao, C.; Fu, Y.; Liu, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, P.; He, Y. 3D printing of ceramics: A review. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc.
2019, 39, 661–687. [CrossRef]
Shahzad, A.; Lazoglu, I. Direct ink writing of structural and functional ceramics: Recent achievements and future challenges.
Compos. B 2021, 225, 109249. [CrossRef]
Jakus, A.; Koube, K.; Geisendorfer, N.; Shah, R. Robust and elastic lunar and martian structures from 3D printed regolith inks. Sci.
Rep. 2017, 7, 44931. [CrossRef]
Rocha, V.; Saiz, E.; Tirichenko, I.; Garcia-Tunon, E. Direct ink writing advances in multi-material structures for a sustainable
future. J. Mater. Chem. A 2020, 8, 15646–15657. [CrossRef]
Bland, P.; Cintala, M.; Horz, F.; Cressey, G. Survivability of meteorite projectiles—Results from impact experiments. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, Houston, TX, USA, 12–16 March 2001; p. 1764.
Bland, P.; Artemieva, N.; Collins, G.; Bottke, W.; Bussey, D.; Joy, K. Asteroids on the Moon: Projectile survival during low velocity
impacts. In Proceedings of the 39th Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, League City, TX, USA, 10–14 March 2008; p. 2045.
Halim, S.; Crawford, I.; Collins, G.; Joy, K.; Davison, T. Assessing the survival of carbonaceous chondrites impacting the lunar
surface as a potential resource. Planet. Space Sci. 2024, 246, 105905. [CrossRef]
Joy, K.; Crawford, I.; Curran, N.; Zolensky, M.; Fagan, A.; King, D. Moon: An archive of small body migration in the solar system.
Earth Moon Planets 2016, 118, 133–158. [CrossRef]
Yang, Y.; Li, S.; Zhu, M.-H.; Liu, Y.; Wu, B.; Du, J.; Fa, W.; Xu, R.; He, Z.; Wang, C.; et al. Impact remnants rich in carbonaceous
chondrites detected on the Moon by the Chang’e 4 rover. Nat. Astron. 2022, 6, 207–213. [CrossRef]
Thomas-Keprta, K.; Clemett, S.; Messenger, S.; Ross, D.; Le, L.; Rahman, Z.; McKay, D.; Gibson, E.; Gonzalez, C.; Peabody, W.
Organic matter on the Earth’s Moon. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 2014, 134, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Ellery, A. Trials and tribulations of asteroid mining. In Proceedings of the ASCE Earth & Space Conference 2024, Miami, FL, USA,
15–18 April 2024; p. 8087.
O’Lenick, A. Basic silicone chemistry—A review. Silicone Spect. 2009. Available online: https://www.scientificspectator.com/
documents/silicone%20spectator/Silicone_Spectator_January_2009.pdf (accessed on 12 August 2025).
Chaudhary, R.; Parameswaran, C.; Idrees, M.; Rasaki, A.; Liu, C.; Chen, Z.; Colombo, P. Additive manufacturing of polymerderived ceramics: Materials, technologies, properties and potential applications. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2022, 128, 100969. [CrossRef]
Davis, P.; Murugavel, R. Recent developments in the chemistry of molecular titanosiloxanes and titanophosphonates. Synth.
React. Inorg. Met. Org. Nano-Met. Chem. 2005, 35, 591–622. [CrossRef]
Unny, R.; Gopinathan, S.; Gopinathan, C. Chelated aluminosiloxanes. Indian. J. Chem. 1980, 19A, 484–486.
Puxviel, J.; Boilot, J.; Poncelet, O.; Hubert-Pfalzgraf, L.; Lecomte, A.; Dauger, A.; Beloeil, J. Aluminosiloxane as a ceramic precursor.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids 1987, 93, 277–286. [CrossRef]
Griffith, M.; Halloran, J. Freeform fabrication of ceramics vis stereolithography. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 1996, 79, 2601–2608. [CrossRef]
Dou, R.; Tang, W.; Hu, K.; Wang, L. Ceramic paste for space stereolithography 3D printing technology in microgravity environments. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 2022, 42, 3968–3975. [CrossRef]
Gibson, M.; Mykulowycz, N.; Shim, J.; Fontana, R.; Schmitt, P.; Roberts, A.; Ketkaew, J.; Shao, L.; Chen, W.; Bordeenithikasem,
P.; et al. 3D printing metals like thermoplastics: Fused filament fabrication of metallic glasses. Mater. Today 2018, 21, 697–702.
[CrossRef]
Liao, C.; Liu MZhang, Q.; Dong, W.; Zhao, R.; Li, B.; Jiao, Z.; Somg, J.; Yao, W.; Zhao, S.; Bai, H.; et al. Low temperature
thermoplastic welding of metallic glass ribbons for in-space manufacturing. Sci. China Mater. 2020, 64, 979–986. [CrossRef]
Xu, X.; Zhang, J.; Jiang, P.; Liu, D.; Jia, X.; Wang, X.; Zhou, F. Direct ink writing of aluminium-phosphate-bonded Al2 O3 ceramic
with ultralow dimensional shrinkage. Ceram. Int. 2022, 48, 864–871. [CrossRef]
Revelo, C.; Colorado, H. 3D printing of kaolinite clay ceramics using direct ink writing (DIW) technique. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44,
5673–5682. [CrossRef]
Marquez, C.; Mata, J.; Renteria, A.; Gonzalez, D.; Gomez, G.; Lopez, A.; Baca, A.; Nunez, A.; Hassan, S.; Burke, V.; et al. Direct
ink-write printing of ceramic clay with an embedded wireless temperature and relative humidity sensor. Sensors 2023, 23, 3352.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Karl, D.; Kamutzki, F.; Lima, P.; Gili, A.; Duminy, T.; Zocca, A.; Gunster, J.; Gurlo, A. Sintering of ceramics for clay in situ resource
utilisation of Mars. Open Ceram. 2020, 3, 100008. [CrossRef]
Tong, W.; Jaw, W.; Pothunuri, L.; Soh, E.; Le Ferrand, H. Easily applicable protocol to formulate inks for extrusion-based 3D
printing. Ceramica 2022, 68, 152–159. [CrossRef]
Lazorenko, G.; Kasprzhitskii, A. Geopolymer additive manufacturing: A review. Addit. Manuf. 2022, 55, 102782. [CrossRef]
Ma, S.; Jiang, Z.; Fu, S.; He, P.; Sun, C.; Duan, X.; Jia, D.; Colombo, P.; Zhou, Y. 3D printed lunar regolith simulant-based
geopolymer composites with bio-inspired sandwich architectures. J. Adv. Ceram. 2023, 12, 510–525. [CrossRef]
Abdulkareem, S.; Orkuma, G.; Apasi, A. Talc as a substitute for dry lubricant (an overview). AIP Proc. 2011, 1315, 1400.

Ceramics 2025, 8, 107

23 of 23

TM-2011-217114/AIAA-2011-704; Thermal Energy for Lunar In Situ Resource Utilisation: Technical Challenges and Technology
Opportunities. NASA: Washington, DC, USA, 2011.
98. Zhang, Y.; Shaw, M.; Brooks, G.; Rhamdhani, A.; Guo, C.; Han, Z.; Jackson, T.; Judkins, G. Investigation of heat transfer processes
in multi-sized solar-sintered regolith for lunar ISRY program. Int. J. Heat. Mass. Transf. 2023, 214, 124387. [CrossRef]
99. Meurisse, A.; Makaya, A.; Willsch, C.; Sperl, M. Solar 3D printing of lunar regolith. Acta Astronaut. 2018, 142, 800–810. [CrossRef]
100. Imhof, B.; Urbina, D.; Weiss, P.; Sperl, M. Advancing solar sintering for building a base on the Moon. In Proceedings of the 67th
International Astronautical Congress, Adelaide, Australia, 25–29 September 2017; IAC-17.C2.9.13.x37414.
101. Imhof, B.; Sperl, M.; Urbina, D.; Weiss, P.; Preisinger, C.; Waclavicek, R.; Hoheneder, W.; Meurisse, A.; Fateri, M.; Gobert, T.; et al.
Using solar sintering to build infrastructure on the Moon: Latest advancements in the Regolight project. In Proceedings of the
69th International Astronautical Congress, Bremen, Germany, 1–5 October 2018; IAC-18.E5.1.x47746.
102. Fateri, M.; Meurisse, A.; Sperl, M.; Urbina, D.; Madakashira, K.; Govindaraj, S.; Gancet, J.; Imhof, B.; Hoheneder, W.; Waclavicek,
R.; et al. Solar sintering for lunar additive manufacturing. ASCE J. Aerosp. Eng. 2019, 32, 04019101. [CrossRef]
103. Biswas, D.; Cox, T.; Lapp, J. Sintering behaviour of lunar soil heated by indirect and direct concentrated sunlight. In Proceedings
of the ASME 16th International Conference on Energy, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 11–13 July 2022; Paper No. ESS2022-81630.
104. Gupta, N.; Dawara, V.; Kumar, A.; Viswanathan, K. Synthetic space bricks from lunar and martian regolith via sintering. Adv.
Space Res. 2024, 74, 3902–3915. [CrossRef]
97.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

