657

REVIEW
Leveraging in situ resources for lunar base construction

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Alex Ellery

Abstract: We explore the limits of in situ resource utilization (ISRU) on the Moon to maximize living off the land by building
lunar bases from in situ material. We adopt the philosophy of indigenous peoples who excelled in sustainability. We are interested in leveraging lunar resources to manufacture an entire lunar base in such a fashion that is fully sustainable and minimizes supplies required from Earth. A range of metals, ceramics and volatiles can be extracted from lunar minerals to support
construction of a lunar base that include structure, piping and electrical distribution systems. To 3D print a lunar base, we
must 3D print the load-bearing structure, electrical distribution system, water-based heating system, drinking water system,
air system and orbital transport system from in situ resources. We also address the manufacture of the interior of the lunar
base from local resources. The majority of systems constituting a lunar base can be manufactured from in situ resources.
Key words: lunar base, in situ resource utilization, sustainable space exploration, additive manufacturing.
Résumé : Nous explorons les limites de l’utilisation des ressources in situ (URIS) sur la Lune pour maximiser la vie sur la Lune
en construisant des bases lunaires à partir de matériaux in situ. Nous adoptons la philosophie des peuples autochtones qui ont
excellé en matière de durabilité. Nous sommes intéressés à tirer parti des ressources lunaires pour fabriquer une base lunaire
entière d’une manière totalement durable et qu’elle minimise les approvisionnements requis de la Terre. Une gamme de
métaux, céramiques et composants volatils peuvent être extraits des minéraux lunaires pour soutenir la construction d’une
base lunaire qui comprend la structure, la tuyauterie et le système de distribution électrique. Pour imprimer en 3D une base
lunaire, nous devons imprimer en 3D la structure portante, le système de distribution électrique, le système de chauffage à
l’eau, le système d’eau potable, le système d’air et le système de transport orbital à partir de ressources in situ. Nous abordons
également la fabrication de l’intérieur de la base lunaire à partir de ressources locales. La majorité des systèmes constituant
une base lunaire peuvent être fabriqués à partir de ressources in situ. [Traduit par la Rédaction]
Mots-clés : base lunaire, utilisation in situ des ressources, exploration spatiale durable, fabrication additive.

1. Introduction
Everyone is going to the Moon. The Chinese Chang’e programme
is a vigorous lunar exploration programme (https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Chinese_Lunar_Exploration_Program) – Chang’e 4 landed
on the lunar farside and hosted a small garden of seedlings that
germinated on the Moon; Change’e 5 recently returned almost
2 kg of lunar samples to Earth from the 1.2–2.0 By old Oceanus
Procellarum region to enable calibration of solar system ages
based on cratering densities; Chang’e 6 will be another sample
return mission in 2023 followed by Chang’e 7 and then Change’e 8
scheduled for 2027 which will operate a 3D printer to demonstrate
use of lunar regolith as a structural material. Clearly, the Chinese
programme is focussed on lunar base development for human
habitation. Currently, the US Lunar Gateway is also envisaged to
be supported by a lunar surface habitat, a lunar mobile habitat,
and a lunar terrain vehicle for deployment at the lunar south pole.
Beyond this, the Moon Village is an open concept to build a
complete infrastructure comprising several lunar bases of
perhaps 100 personnel devoted to different tasks operated by
different institutions. For a sustained presence on the Moon, we
need to emplace a space infrastructure which itself is premised
on leveraging local resources as far as possible. We consider the
lunar base as the central component of the Moon Village and
explore the degree to which it might be leveraged from local
resources. Fabrication of assets using in situ resources on the

Moon is an extension of the goal of eliminating in-space spares
and reducing re-supply from Earth. The lunar base is also an
essential precursor to a Mars base to mitigate the risks of the
latter (Mendell 1991). Long duration missions require infrastructure
with the ability to self-repair to yield 100% reliability (Murphy et al.
2009) — this implies that reliability is enhanced if in situ resource
utilization (ISRU) can be leveraged to the maximum extent, i.e., as
close to 100% as is feasible. Our concern is to leverage lunar bases/
habitats from in situ resources beyond the supply of water to
robotically build the entire habitat from in situ resources in
preparation for human occupancy. Once productive assets are
emplaced on the Moon, the private sector may exploit these assets
in the pursuit of commerce — private space companies have
ﬂourished recently including SpaceX, Blue Origin, Virgin Galactic,
and Moon Express. Although it is fruitless to speculate on the
course of such future entrepreneurship, several possible applications
come to mind such as the manufacture of solar power satellites
(Ellery 2016) and space-based geoengineering (Ellery 2017) from lunar
resources that circumvent the high costs of launch from Earth.

2. Lunar environment
The lunar environment imposes reduced gravity loading, high
radiation and micrometeorite ﬂux, a pervasive and abrasive dust
problem, severe high-low temperature excursions, a high pressuredifferential between interior and exterior lunar base environments,
and material outgassing due to vacuum. The daytime temperature

Received 23 February 2021. Accepted 10 July 2021.
A. Ellery. Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.
Email for correspondence: aellery@mae.carleton.ca.
© 2021 The Author(s). Permission for reuse (free in most cases) can be obtained from copyright.com.
Can. J. Civ. Eng. 49: 657–674 (2022) dx.doi.org/10.1139/cjce-2021-0098

Published at www.cdnsciencepub.com/cjce on 22 July 2021.

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

658

on the Moon reaches up to 400 K dropping to under 120 K at night
(40 K in permanently shadowed craters). Internal heat ﬂow to the
subsurface during the lunar day ranges from 0.016 to 0.021 W/m2;
during the lunar night, heat loss is by thermal emittance from the
regolith to deep space.
Lunar dust is a ubiquitous problem on the Moon due to high
particle angularity imparting high abrasiveness on seals, optical
surfaces, thermal surfaces and, for human missions, deleterious
physiological effects. Fine-grained lunar dust is levitated by solar
ultraviolet radiation during the day and by solar wind ﬂux at
night (Horanyi et al. 1998). Lunar regolith has increasing abundances of agglutinate glasses and nanophase metallic iron content with decreasing size (Gaussian average size is 3.0 lm) (Liu
and Taylor 2008). Nanophase iron Fe0 in lunar regolith appear as
10 nm diameter inclusions within glasses produced by microtektite bombardment of the lunar surface (Keller and Clemett
2001). This nanophase iron signiﬁcantly increases the oxidative
reactivity of regolith due to the production of hydroxyl radicals
through Fenton reactions with iron oxides (Wallace et al. 2010).
There are a signiﬁcant number of particles <2.5 lm which are
regarded as toxic to the respiratory system. One way to minimize
dust elevation is to implement transport via cable tracks supported at height above the ground by lufﬁng masts (Benaroya
et al. 2002). Dust mitigation to prevent settling of dust and their
adhesion by van der Waal forces onto solar arrays, thermal radiators and optical surfaces may be achieved through several
mechanisms, including vibromechanical, (electro)magnetic, and
electrostatic removal. Although magnetic approaches are simple
(Eimer and Taylor 2007), electrostatic are favoured as the most
effective (Landis and Jenkins 2002; Calle et al. 2008; Clark et al.
2007). Seals such as gaskets may be used to eliminate leakage across
mechanical barriers which can also provide dynamic spring action.
Mechanical seals include double-shielded ball bearings, dust cups,
brush/felt seals, z-seals, lip seals (e.g., s-lip), dust wipers, and o-ring
seals (variants include v-rings, and t-rings). Most seals squeeze out
voids under compression and, for pressure applications, the seal
transmits external pressure radially. Seals constructed from silicone
elastomer are appropriate for static applications. To account for thermal expansion, a rule of thumb is that the seal should be over-sized
by 10% of its shrunken volume. PTFE dry seals are resistant to temperature excursions; however, composite seals comprise an elastomeric ring with a rigid PTFE working face. However, PTFE o-ring
seals have been tested and found to be inadequate for high dust
environments (Lauer and Allton 1992).
Lunar dust is also a signiﬁcant problem for mechanical components such as motors and gears used on rovers, manipulators,
drills, and manufacturing machines. Rotor/stator airgap, motor
alignment, brush/commutator wear, gearing friction and meshing, sheave seating, connector coupling integrity, bearings and
motor temperature are all detrimentally affected by dust contamination. Rotary seals are used for sealing between moving
parts. While static seals rely on solid-solid contact, rotary seals
require ﬂuid lubrication such as silicone oil to minimize friction
and wear. Magnetic ﬂuid rotary seals can be used in vacuum and
low pressures offering zero leakage for ﬂuid sealing (Cong and Shi
2008). Two opposing magnets create a magnetic circuit and contain
a ferroﬂuid. Ferroﬂuids are colloidal suspensions of paramagnetic
particles of 10 nm diameter within a ﬂuid which imparts paramagnetic behaviour to the ﬂuid as a whole. The application of magnetic
ﬁelds allows control of such ﬂuids which can be used to seal two
regions. This makes them ideal for rotary seals in motors. Nanophase iron may potentially provide the basis for ferroﬂuidic seals
but this has yet to be explored. It is a potential resource for dust mitigation in motorized systems using magnetic seals (Kruzelecky et al.
2010).
Although lunar bases are currently to be emplaced at lunar
poles at peaks of eternal light (with >75% sunlight time) for adjacent access to water ice in permanently shaded craters, access to

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

minerals and volatiles will be required for maximum ISRU leverage (Staehle et al. 1993). Lunar lava tubes offer attractive sites for
habitat locations affording natural protection; for example, there
is a 50 m diameter skylight in a 100 m diameter lava tube 90 m
deep in the Marius Hills at 303°E-14°N (Blamont (2014). It is plausible that such lava tubes may also be repositories of water ice. However, the currently favoured location for a lunar base is on the rim
of the Shackleton crater within the South Pole Aitken Basin.

3. Varieties of lunar habitat
The lunar habitat’s internal space provides a pressurized and
ﬁltered atmosphere with controlled temperature and humidity
for its astronaut inhabitants at a minimum. Reduction of the internal habitat pressure requires an increase in oxygen concentration to maintain its partial pressure — 0.5–0.7 bar requires
25–30% oxygen. There are several approaches to the structure
of a lunar base (Benaroya 2002): (i) spacecraft-type metal structure;
(ii) inﬂatable structure; (iii) truss-based structure; (iv) fused regolith/basalt/concrete structure; (v) tensegrity-based structure;
(vi) hybrid structure. A thin metal (nominally, aluminium) enclosure is simple but offers little shielding — typical spacecraft shielding is approximately 5 g/cm2 Al but ISS offers 20 g/cm2 in several
locations due to passive shielding offered by payload racks. The latter is effective against proton penetration with energies under
100–200 MeV. This is adequate for a storm shelter against short
duration solar proton events. For much heavier and energetic galactic cosmic rays, lightweight passive shielding with high hydrogen
content such as polyethylene or water layer provides around 80%
exposed dose reduction. Active magnetic dipolar shielding has been
proposed to deﬂect incident particle radiation; however, the high
magnetic ﬁelds require superconducting magnets which are impractical (Durante 2014). Aluminium shells are difﬁcult to expand in
size unless they are of modular design. Lunar bases should implement separate but interconnected pressurized compartments with
sealable hatches at both ends to prevent catastrophic leakage of
the entire base. Modules must include sleeping quarters (preferably individual), a galley, a communal wardroom, washing/heads
facilities, a fabrication workshop, one or more scientiﬁc laboratories and stowage facilities. An inﬂatable structure is a lightweight
ﬁbre composite membrane but it is vulnerable to puncture. Hence,
an inﬂatable structure forms the inner membrane of the habitat
around which both stiffening and shielding structure is required.
A truss-manufacturing facility has been suggested for in-space deployment which may be adapted for planetary deployment (Garibotti
et al. 1980) — it is constructed from and produces a truss-based assembly necessary for large rigid structures. Geodetic tubular beams are
constructed from rod feedstock simplifying manufacture while
affording maximum ﬂexibility of design. Truss and tensegrity
structures require internal layers as they are open. A hybrid structure might include several elements such as an inﬂatable structure
enclosed in a tensegrity frame covered in an outer layer of regolith.
It is typically envisaged that lunar base development will evolve
through at least three phases. The ﬁrst stage in the construction of
planetary habitats may be in the delivery of one or more prefabricated modules that must be aligned either by crane or through mobility. Habitat designs tend to follow the modular tube designs of
space stations the size and shape of which are determined by the
launch fairing generating homogeneous but dull and sterile spaces.
Minimum ceiling height is 3.5 m to accommodate ventilation
shafts under reduced gravity. Mobile habitats (mobitats) may
employ wheeled, tracked or legged locomotion but are limited to
approximately 10 tonnes maximum — legs are capable of traversing
rough terrain but suffer from control complexity issues compared
with wheels and tracks (Cohen 2004).
The second stage may involve the erection of inﬂatable membranes requiring a degree of construction effort. Inﬂatables are
typically constructed from ﬁbre-reinforced polymer composites
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

to provide tensile support offering compact storage with low speciﬁc mass of 3 kg/m2. They are employed to form the sealed inner
frame of a spherical, cylindrical or toroidal habitat.
The inner surface comprises a Mylar gas barrier surrounded by
a tensile membrane of multilayer Vectran textile with Nomex for
impact protection or Kevlar cloth. Around this, multilayer thermal insulation is sandwiched by an outer protective layer. An inﬂatable habitat has a structure from inside to outside comprising
(Jablonski and Ogden 2008): (i) woven fabric for acoustic damping,
(ii) inﬂatable multilayer polymer, (iii) multilayer thermal insulation,
(iv) bladder layers for ﬂame and puncture resistance, (v) impact protection fabric. A double-skin fabric membrane structure sandwiching a structural foam of polyurethane impregnated with gas has
been proposed (Chow and Lin 1989). An inner inﬂatable wall based
on structural tubes forming arched structures may provide a
temporary scaffold during construction of the outer wall to keep
the structure within the angle of repose of the regolith. Pressurized
inﬂatables require a gas to inﬂate them — the only local in situ
source of gas is oxygen (which is ﬂammable) and water vapour
(which requires elevated temperatures up to 120 °C). High temperatures can be tolerated if the hydrocarbon polymer is replaced by
temperature tolerant silicone elastomer. Although inﬂatables are
readily transported, they can deﬂate with disastrous consequences
(though rigidized inﬂatables do not suffer this problem) (Benaroya
2002). Alternatively, erectable habitats from ﬂat-packs using motorized rigid panels can autonomously self-assemble into polyhedral
shapes (Ellery and Elaskri 2019) — such rigid panels may be constructed from local resources such as aluminium or cast basalt
tiles. A hybrid approach involves an inﬂatable habitat with rigid
segments; the habitat is inﬂated, whereas the rigid components
must self-deploy and lock into position. The polymers of inﬂatable
structures cannot readily be manufactured in situ, rendering inﬂatable habitats unsuitable for an in situ constructed lunar base.
The third stage involves the exploitation of in situ resources,
initially for the construction of habitats and then incorporating
construction machines themselves. We seek to leapfrog this
phased approach directly to the third stage, a prospect provided
by maximizing leverage of in situ resources that we address later.
NASA recommends a habitation volume of 20 m3/person for
short stays of several months, but long-term habitation requires
120 m3/person. A ﬂoor depth of 4 m provides 3.0–3.5 m of height
space (3.0 m is standard ceiling height), i.e., 30 m2 of ﬂoor space/
person. These requirements increase for bioregenerative life support; food production requires a further 15–40 m2/person (nominally 20 m2), waste-water recycling requires a further 3–5 m2/
person and oxygen production requires a further 6–10 m2/person,
i.e., a further 25–55 m2/person. Most lunar bases are designed for
6–12 persons. With fewer restrictions on size compared with a
space station, a planetary habitat can offer 120 m2 per person to
permit privacy and greater functional versatility of activities.
There are several architectural network conﬁgurations of connected modular volumes — radial, ring, linear and gridded sets
of modular volumes connected by tunnels — which control circulation through connecting modules, each module being dedicated to a speciﬁc function (Porter and Bradley 2016). A common
shape for modules is a dodecahedral shape for rigid aluminium
segments and spheres and cylinders of polymer skins for inﬂatable segments. The radial conﬁguration requires several doors per
module; the ring conﬁguration requires two doors per module;
the linear conﬁguration requires only one door per module. The
radial conﬁguration offers direct paths that bypass other modules such as private quarters.
It is envisaged that lunar bases will not be isolated but will cluster to form a community of bases — the Moon Village. Roadways
accommodate controlled trafﬁc of physical material to and from
a lunar base and between different lunar bases of the Moon Village. The Moon Village must be compact to minimize inter-base
transport. Three types of costs are associated with the transport

659

of goods that affect the relative merits of local in situ resource
access and centralized mining: (i) haul costs which quantify the
cost of haulage due to energy consumption during transport;
(ii) overhead costs which quantify the cost of terminal equipment
at that location; (iii) transfer costs which are costs of cargo transport required for support activities. It is desirable to reduce distances to minimize energy consumption and transfer costs such
as access to energy and water supplies for ore processing. On
Earth, transport by rail offers a balance between the low initial
capital cost but increasing consumption cost of road transport
with distance compared with high initial cost of cargo handling
but insensitivity to distance of ocean transport. Rail requires some
initial cargo handling facilities but the rise in cost with distance is
modest favouring rail as a compromise. Modular metal rail segments may be laid and then welded together — thermite involves
the exothermic reaction between powdered fuel (Al or Mg) and
an oxidizer (silicon oxide or iron oxide) all of which can be recovered from in situ resources, e.g., Fe2O3 + 2Al ! 2Fe + Al2O3. The
Zipf inverse distance law quantiﬁes the volume of material N as
inversely proportional to the distance D travelled:
ð1Þ

N¼

k
D

A more sophisticated gravitational model declares that distance
travelled is dependent on the strength of attraction imposed by additional factors such as terrain relief and obstacles.
ð2Þ

N¼k

ðwi pi  wj pj Þ
daij

where pi = demand at location i, pj = demand at location j, dij =
distance between locations i and j, a = exponent of distance that
determines the sharpness of attraction, wi,j = weighting factors
that quantify other factors such as relief, and obstacles. This can
be modelled readily by a potential ﬁeld representation implemented on rover platforms, e.g., Frazier et al. (2014).

4. In situ compressive engineering materials
We ﬁrst consider the primary structure of a lunar base as this
comprises the dominant mass of the lunar base. Traditional universal civil engineering materials include stone, brick, lime,
cement, sand, cement/lime/mud mortar, concrete, metals (steel,
aluminium, copper) and glass. Plastic has been widely used as a
substitute for many materials — one of the simplest plastics to
manufacture is Bakelite, a synthetic phenol formaldehyde thermosetting resin formed through a condensation reaction of phenol with formaldehyde in the presence of HCl or NH3 catalyst. It
may be cast or moulded into heat-resistant non-electrically conducting shapes. The paucity of carbon on the Moon renders the
manufacture of carbon chain plastics unsuitable unless they are
recycled; thermosetting is difﬁcult to recycle unlike thermoplastics. We wish to avoid the use of wood, plastic, organic paints, varnishes, and binders. In space, materials must exhibit low outgassing
in vacuum which eliminates many plastics and adhesives, such as
polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polytetraﬂuoroethylene, nylon,
acrylics, and some metals, such as zinc, magnesium and most solders and some brazing alloys. Hydrocarbon plastics degrade when
exposed to radiation and (or) temperatures exceeding 120 °C rendering them unsuitable for deployment on the Moon. Although
polyethylene (C2H4)n is widely used as sealant and epoxy, these
roles can be undertaken by silicones which have high radiation
and temperature tolerance due to their silicate backbones. Appropriate in situ materials include steels, aluminium, titanium, nickel,
tungsten, silicone plastics and ceramic substitutes for plastics such
as alumina, porcelain, and glass. Our lunar industrial ecology produces the ceramics silica, alumina and rutile from lunar minerals
and bulk metals aluminium and iron and associated alloying
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

660

metals. We refer to the lunar industrial ecology in Appendix A
that schematizes the basic raw materials extractable from the
Moon.
Different options are available for the construction of primary
structures from lunar material for lunar bases and other civil engineering erections. These include loose regolith, sintered regolith, cast basalt, glass/glass ﬁbre reinforced composites, metals
such as aluminium and various concretes, the most promising of
which are cast regolith and lunar glass (Happel 1993). All these materials can be subjected to variants of 3D printing techniques. Concrete
comprises aggregate, sand and binder - the binder (cement) is traditionally calcium silicate which, when water is added, hardens.
The cement mixer was adopted for NASA’s Precursor ISRU
Lunar Oxygen Testbed (PILOT) to mix and heat the regolith in a
tumbling reactor. Alternatively, an internal auger can stir the regolith without reliance on gravity. Terrestrial Portland cement is
manufactured by roasting limestone or chalk (CaCO3) and aluminosilicate clay in a kiln at 1450 °C to form clinker — a mixture of
quicklime (CaO) with oxides of silicon, iron, and aluminium. The
cooled clinker is combined with gypsum (which causes the
cement to set) and powdered. The cement powder forms a paste
when mixed with water to which sand and gravel are added to form
concrete. It hardens through hydration reactions over time to form
a matrix of calcium silicate hydrate. This yields large amounts of
CO2 (CaCO3 ! CaO + CO2) from the limestone accounting for 5% of
all GHG emissions (Amato 2013). The furnace is also typically powered through fossil fuel combustion yielding further CO2 emissions.
Sulphur concrete has been proposed as a lunar alternative to
Portland cement with rapid setting to within 70%–80% of ultimate compressive strength within 24 h without the use of water.
Sulphur cement has higher compressive strength than Portland
cement. Sulphur concrete uses 12%–22% sulphur as a thermoplastic binder which is melted at 119 °C and mixed with any type of
aggregate and then hardens. Sulphur concrete can be recycled by
heating to 120 °C to melt the sulphur as there is no chemical reaction between the binder and its other components. A lunar version of sulphur concrete would be a mixture of 65% regolith with
35% sulphur which can tolerate sub-zero temperatures (Gracia
and Casanova 1998). Unfortunately, sulphur has a low average
concentration of 0.16–0.27% in high-Ti mare basalt (average 715 6
216 lg/g), mostly in the form of troilite (FeS) typically associated
with ilmenite; signiﬁcant regolith must be processed to yield sufﬁcient sulphur for large-scale concrete structures. Heating troilite in oxygen to 1100–1300 °C releases 80%–95% of its sulphur
as SO2 leaving magnetite (Fe3O4) (Vaniman et al. 1992). There are
rare sulphide minerals as small grains in lunar regolith such
as chalcopyrite (CuFeS2), pentlandite ((Fe,Ni)9S8) and sphalerite
((Zn,Fe)Si) but these will be difﬁcult to process. There are very
small amounts sulphurous volatiles (H2S and SO2) in the regolith,
and the Claus reaction of H2S and SO2 yields sulphur and water.
Asteroidal resources however are more promising with achondrites offering a low concentration of under 1% of FeS-based sulphur rising to 5%–6% in some carbonaceous chondrites but can
reach as high as 15%. Sulphur’s melting point at 120 °C prevents
its use in environments where such temperatures are exceeded
such as the lunar equatorial surface where its use would be marginal (temperature range +123 °C to 220 °C). Furthermore, the
low ambient pressure 1010 Pa on the lunar surface renders sulphur prone to sublimation (Grugel 2008). Mass evaporation rate
C may be estimated through the Hertz-Knudsen equation:
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m
ðP0  PÞ
ð3Þ
C ¼ av
2p RT
where a v = evaporation coefﬁcient = 1 for sulphur (assumption
consistent with values for metals and metal oxides), m = atomic
mass = 32.06 for sulphur, R = gas constant, T = absolute temperature, P0 = partial pressure of gas in equilibrium with its solid, and

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

P = ambient pressure. At room temperature, sulphur sublimation
rates yield a 5-year timescale to erode a 1 cm deep layer in sulphur
concrete, sufﬁcient to impose an integrity hazard and this will
increase substantially with increased temperature. Thermal cycling between –190 °C and 20 °C yields an 80% loss in compressive
strength of sulphur concrete due to differences in thermal expansion of sulphur and silicate. Indeed, sulphur concrete is limited to
temperatures below 96 °C to due to its phase transition at 96 °C
causing a 7% volume change that would cause cracking. We conclude that sulphur concrete is not practical because: (i) sulphur
is not particularly common on the Moon compared with calcium
and water; (ii) intolerance of upper lunar temperatures (up to
125 °C) and thermal cycling. Water appears to have greater abundance in polar regions than sulphur sources suggesting that
more traditional Portland-type cements may be more practical.
Several other potential lunar cements are possible subject to
minor constraints (Wilhelm and Curbach 2014; Ishikawa et al.
1992) — lunar pyroxene and plagioclase feldspar are sources of
quicklime (CaO) (Mueller et al. 2016). “Lunarcrete” may be formed
from melted individual minerals CaO, SiO2, and Al2O3 at 3000 K
and quenched and mixed with water. Portland lunarcrete would
comprise 60%–69% CaO (nominally 64% CaO which could be
sourced from high calcium anorthite with up to 19% CaO), 20%–
24% SiO2 (sourced from anorthite and (or) orthoclase), 3%–4%
Al2O3 (sourced from anorthite) and 2%–4% Fe2O3 (sourced from ilmenite) mixed with in situ water which may be cast and cured
under pressurized conditions to prevent water evaporation (Lin
1987). Concrete typically provides a compression strength of 30–
40 MPa after a month of setting time. Rather than wet mix
cement which is water-intensive (25%–40% water in Portland
cement), injecting steam into dry cement (dry mix/steam injection) at 180–200 °C and elevated pressure for 18 h reduces the
required water to a water/cement ratio of 15%–25%. It gives a compression strength of 70 MPa. Glass ﬁbres or metal rebar may be
incorporated into concrete as reinforcement to increase its mechanical strength. If 1% polyethylene imported from Earth were
added to concrete, its radiation shielding effectiveness would be
dramatically enhanced.
An alternative lunarcrete comprises 90% regolith with 10%
thermoplastic (polyethylene) binder by mass which may be cast
in moulds and heated to 230 °C for 5 h to cure into bricks with a
strength of 12.6–12.9 MPa (Lee et al. 2015). This requires plastic
binder to be transported from Earth as well as being unsuitable
due to its tendency to outgassing. A geopolymer binder (aluminosilica activated by a solution of sodium silicate and sodium hydroxide) with 98% lunar regolith may be used to manufacture
structural panels for radiation shielding and thermal insulation
with a strength of 16–37 MPa (Montes et al. 2015). NaCl is already
required to be transported from Earth as a recycled reagent for
the lunar industrial ecology (Appendix A), but its use as a consumer product, concrete, is wasteful of a valuable material. It is
best reserved as recycled reagents. Metals such as aluminium can
be melted to which lunar regolith can be added to form a composite of 30%–40% aluminium with a compressive strength of
13.8 MPa. We propose that kaolinite clay may be employed as a
wet binder with water resembling its use in terrestrial Portland
cement. Kaolinite is a waste product of artiﬁcial weathering of orthoclase with HCl acid to yield silica in the lunar industrial ecology (Appendix A). However, the processing complexity of cement
and its poor bulk structural performance suggest that it may be
employed as a joining material. Alternatively, mortar is a paste
used to bind bricks, and the simplest mortar is sun-dried clay. Kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4) is a clay produced through chemical weathering of aluminium silicates such as lunar feldspar (Appendix A).
Ultimately, binding might be eliminated altogether, e.g., the Armadillo Vault is a 15 m diameter dome constructed from 400 limestone slabs without any adhesive.
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

Solar sintering of regolith eliminates the requirement for polymer, salt or clay binders. Sintering requires lower temperatures
under the melting point to partially melt the powdered material
followed by slow cooling to a solid. Compression pressure is
required to reduce porosity and shrinkage. Regolith can be sintered into bricks at 1100 °C; sintered regolith has a high compression strength and mixing metal particles into regolith during
sintering increases its tensile strength. A sintered regolith outer
shell reinforced with ribs acts as a micrometeorite and radiation
shield and offers good thermal insulation properties enhanced
with a vacuum layer formed by the ribs. The vacuum gap insulates against conductive and convective heat losses. Sintering
may be implemented by solar concentrators or microwave processing at 1000–1100 °C just below regolith melting temperatures.
Microwave sintering exploits the ubiquity of nanophase iron in
regolith that acts as thermal nuclei to rapidly melt it at 1200–
1500 °C. Microwave sintering offers stronger binding than solar
concentrator sintering. Regolith sintering may be extended to
the surrounding terrain in the vicinity of the base comprising
foundation and roadways to mitigate against dust generation.
Sintering regolith with 15% steel powder yields a compressive
strength of 55 MPa. Microwave-sintered bricks may be formed
from nanophase iron-impregnated lunar regolith in an alumina
crucible placed directly into a microwave cavity (Thiebaut and
Cowley 2019). Refractory bricks may be manufactured through a
geothermite reaction involving 33% aluminium powder mixed
with 67% lunar regolith (incorporating mineral oxides silica, alumina and spinel) (Faierson et al. 2010). Refractory bricks also may
be manufactured by mixing metal oxide particles with 5%–15% organic binder such as glycerol, clay/water or sulphur which is subsequently burned out. Automated robotic manipulation of large
construction bricks is required for construction of structures.
Self-assembly will require that bricks incorporate their own
actuation and computing capabilities or that an external manipulator or crane is necessary. Bricks may be employed for constructing unpressurised gravitationally-loaded structures.
Cast regolith is melted in a furnace at 1200–1500 °C and cooled
slowly in a mould for crystallization to occur to form bricks or
panels. Alternatively, rather than regolith, lunar basalt may be
open-cast mined with minimal blasting and crushed into <0.1 m
sized pebbles. It may be melted in a furnace with preheating to
maximize heating uniformity and reducing the melt time signiﬁcantly. It is cooled slowly to ensure crystal growth to create large
structural components such as foundations, roads, bricks, and
compressive structures. Lunar basalt may also be sintered into
glass (Pletka 1993). Lunar basalt comprises 15%–35% plagioclase
feldspar, 40%–65% pyroxene, 0%–35% olivine and, most critically,
0%–25% ilmenite which lowers its melting point. The basalt is
crushed into a ﬁne powder and poured into a solar-powered furnace at 1180–1240 °C to completely melt the basalt, which
requires energy of 360 kWh/Mtonne. Casting of basalt follows
that of metal casting offering the means for creating simple civil
structures with high temperature and high abrasion conditions,
and cast basalt has been used in the Czech Republic, particularly
for pipe manufacture. The molten basalt is poured into a mould
and subjected to 5–10 MPa through isostatic pressing to reduce
porosity. In sand moulds, basalt is cooled slowly from 900 °C to
50 °C to partially recrystallize. Basalt may be extruded as glass
ﬁbre with rapid cooling for use as composite reinforcement. Cast
basalt has a reasonably high strength of 30 MPa. To reduce the
brittleness of cast basalt to accommodate tensile loads, higher
melting temperatures of 1200–1300 °C may be implemented (Rogers
and Sture 1991). Basalt powder may also be sintered for up to
3 days at 1100 °C under compression to reduce its porosity and
yield a compressive strength of 350 MPa for ﬁne grained basalt
(coarse grained basalt yields much poorer compressive strength).
Sintering with native glass can densify basalt at much lower temperatures 800 °C. Several hours cooling of basalt structures is

661

required to prevent large temperature gradients and thermal
shock. This can be avoided through microwave heating
enhanced by basalt’s ilmenite fraction. It has been suggested
that late-stage residual molten melts may be foamed using CO
gas to manufacture lightweight structures with enhanced
enrichments of K2O or P2O5 (Roedder 1981) but carbon is a scarce
material on the Moon rendering it unsuitable for bulk applications. Cast basalt has very high compressive strength and highmoderate tensile strength (much higher than concrete) for the
manufacture of columns, beams, tiles, shells, bricks, arches and
pipes under compression. It has high abrasion resistance and is
suited to piping or pipe lining applications for iron or aluminium pipes, e.g., oxygen, water, and sewage due to high corrosion
resistance. Much of the compressive load function of ceramics
such as cast basalt could be undertaken by metal alloys which
also have tensile load superiority. However, cast ceramics offer
high heat and corrosion-resistance and low thermal expansion.
Refractories such as alumina are essential for handling high temperature materials for industrial processing, e.g., linings for solar furnaces, and casting moulds.

5. 3D printing compressive structures
There are several tasks required during construction of a lunar
base: (i) site surveying; (ii) rock removal and site levelling; (iii) excavation and trenching; (iv) pipe laying (v) cable laying; (vi) transport
and deposit cargo; (vii) facility construction and installation;
(viii) base assembly and ﬁnishing. The ﬁrst task must be surface
surveying which may be achieved during rover traverse. We have
demonstrated the use of wheel load sensors and wheel motor
current measurements on our 32 kg Kapvik microrover to extract
continuous estimates of standard civil engineering soil mechanics
parameters (soil cohesion and friction angle) derived from the
wheel-terrain interaction models during the rover’s traverse of
sandy terrain (Cross et al. 2013). Prior to emplacement of the habitat, it is necessary to create foundations to ﬂatten and solidify the
surface. The next task is to deploy a bulldozing blade to robotically excavate a level foundation to a depth of 1 m or more on
which a habitat can reside. Shallow subsurface surveying may be
undertaken using ground-penetrating radar (GPR), and we have
demonstrated ﬁeld magnetometer surveys on our 32 kg Kapvik
microrover (Hay et al. 2018). The excavated regolith from the foundation depth may be employed as an overlying radiation shield.
Solidiﬁcation of surface regolith may be achieved using a solar
sinterer such as a mobile Fresnel lens which can achieve the temperatures required for sintering, e.g., Marcus Kayser’s solar sinterer.
Sintering lunar regolith using solar concentrators was demonstrated on JSC-2A regolith simulant over 5 h 30 m (McKay et al.
1996). The regolith surface may be pre-prepared by thermal fusing of regolith into a paved glass layer using a Fresnel lens. Fused
foundations support buildings and solid smooth roads support
rovers while reducing dust elevation during operational activities. This dictates the central role of robotic vehicles in lunar
base construction. Recently, the application of cartesian robots
for the construction of lunar bases has extended its criticality in
the form of 3D printing.
Large compressive structures may be 3D printed though with
low accuracy and tolerances. Automated construction uses largescale robotics to overcome the typical limits of 3D printing but
do not require high positioning accuracy. Freeform construction
has been demonstrated on Earth involving robotic additive layering of concrete with high degrees of automation (Buswell et al.
2007). Selective deposition of Portland cement using steam as the
binding agent is compatible with layer-by-layer construction of
buildings. It eliminates standardized concrete blocks and proceeds
in a different direction to the modular concept of prefabricated
modules (Balaguer et al. 2002). Terrestrial automated building
robots for constructing multi-story buildings are reviewed in
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

662

Skibniewski and Wooldridge (1992). The most common approach
is the electrically powered crane concept since it can lift large
loads while mobile robots cannot (Leyh 1995). The sensorised
RoboCrane has a suspended deposition nozzle supplied with
cement feedstock for extrusion (Williams et al. 2004). RoboCrane
itself is a 6 degree-of-freedom inverted Stewart platform with
6 actuating cables suspended from a large rigid overhead crane.
The sensors were three rangeﬁnder lasers to measure the location of the extrusion head.
The All-Terrain Hex-Limbed Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (ATHLETE)
is a robotic rover chassis that can be employed as a precise positioning mechanism for 3D printing large civil engineering structures
on the Moon (Howe et al. 2013). As civil engineering structures,
they would not require precision manipulation and may be constructed from local regolith including prefabricated bricks or 3D
printing (such as contour crafting). ATHLETE itself is a six-limbed
rover where each 6 degree-of-freedom revolute jointed (YPPRPR)
limb terminates in a wheel for high terrainability. It can wheel
walk with locked wheels on rugged terrain and roll its wheels over
more benign terrain. A variety of sample acquisition tools may be
employed by ATHLETE such as dozer blades, backhoe shovels (such
as in a JCB conﬁguration), drills, bucket wheels, drums, etc. (Howe
and Wilcox 2016). Our own Kapvik microrover has demonstrated
sample recovery using a backhoe scoop. Each ATHLETE limb also
has a tool adaptor interface to substitute wheels for tooling to double as manipulators. The chassis mounts a freeform additive construction system (FACS) comprising the sixth limb mounting a
printhead for additively manufacturing compressive structures
(paving, walls, domes, vaults and shielding) on planetary surfaces
(Howe et al. 2015). There are four proposed printheads for additive
manufacturing: (i) a tunable microwave sintering head to sinter/
melt regolith in situ (microwave may also simultaneously recover
regolith volatiles (Howe et al. 2016)); (ii) ﬁbre-optic solar concentrator to sinter/melt regolith through a quartz rod focus; (iii) concrete
slurry extruder head from which the slurry hardens on laying;
(iv) polymer binder extruder head that extrudes regolith mixed
with binder (20:1 ratio of regolith-to-binder). SinterHab is a modular
hybrid lunar base concept based on imported inﬂatable membrane
structures with pre-fabricated foldable rigid segments supplemented with a protective outer shell of microwave-sintered 3D
printed regolith (Rousek et al. 2012). The Sinterator demonstrator
comprised the ATHLETE lunar rover equipped with contour crafting
head with a microwave magnetron generator. The ﬁve limb-wheels
provide gross positioning while the sixth manipulator provides ﬁne
positioning with mm accuracy. Ground beacons may be employed
to increase the accuracy of rover navigation to permit construction,
including additive construction, of elements of a lunar base. CAD
models of civil engineering structures could be FAXed to the planetary rover from Earth prior to human crew arrival (Howe et al.
2013). The elimination of handling of large modules through 3D
printing eases the design of the robotic mechanisms. Analogue lunar
regolith has been LENS-3D printed into dense hard ceramic/glass
parts without macroscopic defects using laser energies 2 J/mm2
(corresponding to a laser power of 50 W at a scan speed of 20 mm/s
with powder feed rates of 12 g/min) (Baila et al. 2011). Basaltic 3D
printing of habitat structures on Mars (equally applicable to the
Moon) involves melting basalt powder beds using solar concentrators (Kading and Straub 2015). Concrete printing involves the extrusion of cement mortar of 54% sand, 36% cement and 10% water by
mass (Lim et al. 2012) though other cements are plausible.
A recent concept is 3D printing of compressive structures on
extraterrestrial bodies based on regolith (Mueller et al. 2016) such
as contour crafting (Khoshnevis et al. 2005) and D-shape (Cesaretti
et al. 2014) both of which have many similarities. In these cases,
lunar regolith is mixed with a binder and then extruded into layers
to form the outer shells of lunar bases. Contour crafting is a gantrybased 3D printing technique involving extrusion of a material paste
such as concrete through nozzles which is smoothed with robotic

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

trowels to directly construct buildings layer-by-layer (Leach et al. 2012;
Khoshnevis and Zhang 2012). The extrusion nozzle has a top trowel
and an outer side trowel which smooth the outer and top layer
of concrete (inner surface remaining unﬁnished) once deposited.
A gantry mounts the nozzle on an overhead crossbeam carried
by two vertical cranes running on two parallel rails with the nozzle moving laterally to build structures within its work volume.
The cranes raise the nozzle platform at each pass. The gantry
frame must be transported between construction sites similarly
to a dragline. Reinforcement mesh, piping and cabling may be
inserted into conduits within walls as the layers are built up
(Khoshnevis 2004). The mounting gantry provides a more rigid
frame than a crane but it must be transportable for multiple use
(Khoshnevis et al. 2005). The mobile gantry robot essentially comprises two rovers connected by an overhead crossbeam. During
transport, motor joint compliance will be essential to minimize
stresses; however, once positioned, all joints must be locked.
D-shape is a 3D printing method suited to large scale construction in a single process that is similar to fused deposition modelling. It involves the extrusion of lunar regolith premixed with a
binder which is deposited into layers. D-shape provides a means
to directly construct the outer protective shell of lunar habitats
in any shape (Ceccanti et al. 2010; Cesaretti et al. 2014). It employs
a gantry-mounted deposition head on a large plotting machine.
The printer is based on a spraying head which moves in the xy
plane. It sprays a layer of regolith with the binding ﬂuid acting as
an ink at rate of 10–20 cm/s with an accuracy of 5 mm. The frame
moves in the z direction to create the multiple layers. The print
head comprises multiple nozzles to spray the material rapidly
while a levelling blade and rolling cylinders level and pressurize
the layer respectively. The binder ﬂuid is ejected through a thin
nozzle beneath the surface of the regolith layer to minimize
binding ﬂuid evaporation. The liquid binder is a saturated salt solution of MgCl2.6H2O which reacts with MgO in the regolith in
the ratio of 1:3 to form hydrated Sorel cement Mg4Cl2(OH)6(H2O)8
with a compressive strength of 70 MPa. A chemical reaction
between the metal oxide in the regolith and the liquid salt forms
Sorel cement (Mg4Cl2(OH)6(H2O)8) which solidiﬁes the regolith.
Metal oxides in the regolith include MgO, SiO2, FeO, CaO, and
Al2O3 but if not, 15%–30% MgO must be added. The formation of
Sorel concrete as a mixture of MgO and MgCl2 salt requires 70%
water solution. Sorel cement sets rapidly within a few hours to
yield 70 MPa compression strength within a few hours. To avoid
the ink solidifying too rapidly, it is deposited in small droplets.
The D-Shape process of mixing lunar regolith with MgO/MgCl2
binder has been demonstrated on the construction of a 1.5 tonne
foam block. The components of Sorel cement may both be derived
from lunar olivine through the lunar industrial ecology (Appendix A)
by exploiting olivine’s instability to hydration:
Mg2 SiO4 þ 4H2 O ! 2MgO þ SiO2 þ 4H2 O
forsterite
MgO þ HCl ! MgCl2 þ H2 O
These 3D printing methods are suitable for the construction of
outer shells. An inner inﬂatable skin is usually proposed to provide a pressurized inner membrane for habitation whilst the
outer 3D printed structure provides impact, radiation and thermal protection. To maximize the leverage of in situ resources, a
more sustainable approach is possible which does not require
the import of inﬂatable fabrics from Earth. At a minimum, the
habitat structure must provide shielding against external factors
and integrity against internal air pressure of approximately 100 kPa
depending on the habitat air pressure design. However, a greater
degree of physical security can be implemented using local resources. Inner structural walls of aluminium metal provide air sealing
around which fused regolith glass ﬁbre thermal insulation is sandwiched to an outer structural wall of basalt or fused regolith. Lunar
regolith glass may be manufactured by melting regolith and cooling
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

it rapidly, especially glass ﬁbres drawn during rapid cooling. They
may be employed for structural purposes in composites but are useless for optical applications (for optical components, fused silica
glass may be manufactured from pure silica by melting it at
2000 °C and cooling it rapidly to prevent crystallization). Alternatively, mineral wool is formed by spinning or drawing of molten
mineral or rock with applications for high temperature thermal
insulation, ﬁre-prooﬁng, soundprooﬁng, vibration-damping and as
a hydroponic growth medium. Aluminosilicate wool is a high temperature ceramic wool made from melted Al2O3/SiO2 in a 50:50 ratio with application temperatures up to 900 °C. Kaowool is a
very high temperature mineral wool made from kaolin with
application temperatures of 1650 °C. Ceramic-ﬁbre cloth forms a
similar structure to Chobham armour to provide a high degree of
physical protection from signiﬁcant meteor impacts as well as
micrometeoroid ﬂux. Either or both walls may be reinforced with
metal ribs to provide tensile resistance.
An outer shell of unprocessed regolith may be piled at high
angles of repose due to its high frictional properties to provide
radiation protection. Bulldozing of regolith to emplace regolith
shielding against micrometeorites, radiation and thermal extremes
to human habitations is one relatively modest capability that can be
conducted by appropriately conﬁgured rovers. More challenging to
pack but easier to stack would be sandbagging of regolith (Weaver
and Laursen 1992) deployed to form compliant space-ﬁlling barriers
(Soleymani et al. 2015). While typical terrestrial annual radiation exposure is 0.3 rem (1 rem = 10 mSv), the annual radiation dose on the
Moon at solar minimum is 30 rem but during a solar ﬂare reaches
1000 rem — annual radiation dose for radiation workers is restricted
to 5 rem (dropping to 0.5 rem for the general public). A 1.5–3.0 m
(nominally 2.5 m) thick regolith layer is sufﬁcient to provide radiation shielding >400 g/cm2 to reduce annual radiation exposure from
0.3 Sv to 0.05 Sv (5 rem limit for radiation workers) (Silberberg et al.
1985) reducing the required thickness of aluminium from 10 cm to
1–2 cm (Pham and El-Genk 2009). Internal radiation storm shelter
may be implemented within a water-jacket providing >700 g/cm2
cumulative shielding to reduce annual radiation exposure to
under 5 rem – unlike polyethylene used in submarines, water is
available in situ. The thermal diffusivity of lunar regolith is low
at 6.6  109 m2/s and its speciﬁc heat capacity is high at 1000 J/kg/K
at 500 K and 1400 J/kg/K at 1300 K. Its thermal conductivity is low at
0.1 W/m/K at 500 K and 0.4 W/m/K at 1000 K peaking to 1.2 W/m/K at
1400 K. Hence, lunar regolith is an excellent thermal insulator reducing the lunar temperature excursion of 170 °C to +110 °C (6280 °C)
to 610 °C at 20 cm depth and 61 °C at 40 cm depth around an equilibrium temperature of 20 °C. Hence, the regolith outer layer
affords a layer of stable thermal insulation.

6. The complexity of the lunar habitat
A lunar habitat is far more complex than mere structure. Any
extraterrestrial habitat must serve stringent functional roles
simultaneously to ensure mission success — protection against
hazards such as radiation and micrometeorites, life support functions (including breathable air, comfortable working conditions
of warmth and humidity, supply and processing of food and removal of wastes), and promote psychological well-being. It must
also serve a utilitarian function such as a scientiﬁc research station or industrial control centre. A lunar base is typically zoned:
(i) the habitat area is supported by other adjacent areas; (ii) scientiﬁc laboratory areas; (iii); logistical staging areas; (iv) power generator areas; and (v) mining and material processing areas for
ISRU activities. Any lunar base must also have peripheral assets
such as roads, utilities (power, water, air), storage facilities and
launchpads as well as mining/manufacturing facilities (Benaroya
et al. 2002). In particular, we draw attention to: (i) lunar basalt
may be cast to form piping for the distribution of water, sewage,
and air through the habitat; (ii) electrical cabling and insulation

663

for the distribution of electric power and electronic routing of
data may also constructed from in situ resources. These two fundamental lunar habitat infrastructure systems go beyond mere
structure to provide deepened functionality to the habitat.
The modular lunar base comprises several different functional
modules:
(i) Life support systems are crucial for recycling air and water
while providing thermal control. Natural light is favoured directed
through mirrors and (or) ﬁbre-optic cabling. Photosynthetically
active electric lighting is also required when and if mirrored sunlight is not available. This provides a major ingredient to the implementation of lunar agriculture for closed loop ecological life
support through food production. Such bio-regenerative life support
is preferable to physico-chemical life support - both food production
and atmosphere/water recycling with waste management are
simultaneously enabled through a dedicated agricultural module
illuminated by a combination of natural sunlight and artiﬁcial
light. Bioregenerative life support requires a high proportion of
crew time for maintenance, typically 2.5 hours per day but gardening activities are psychologically beneﬁcial. It has been asserted
that weekly exposure of 120–200 min of recreational contact with
nature affords optimal mental health beneﬁt suggesting a minimum apportionment of horticultural activity among the crew
(Douglas 2021). High efﬁciency hydroponics and aquaculture for
high protein insects and ﬁsh provide the major food groups which
must be tended by robotic tractors and harvesters. Agriculture
must be supported by recycling facilities to recover volatiles of
all major CHONPS elements and all minor elements such as selenium. In general, garbage must be disposed at discrete locations,
collected and processed for recycling of material, which requires
design-for-recycling with ready separability of multiple materials.
These agricultural facilities should be modularized into a minimum
of two garden modules for redundancy and robustness.
(ii) A bridge/control room that constitute the central facility for
all activities within and without the base involving control panels,
computers and displays connected to a sensor network to monitor
its status. General cabin environment monitoring for life support
includes measurement of radiation, pressure, temperature and concentrations of oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapour, and organic
volatiles. Multiplexed quartz ﬁbres sensitive to speciﬁc analytes is
enabled by end-coating them with speciﬁc thin ﬁlm coatings giving
differential reﬂectance (Ramsden et al. 2007). The depressed immunity of astronauts during spaceﬂight renders them vulnerable to
microbial infection and tumour growth during extended, high
stress missions. Microbial contamination through the habitat may
be monitored using similar methods to measure microbial loading
of aerosols in habitat air (van Houdt et al. 2012). A more invasive
approach to health monitoring of astronauts is analyzing body
ﬂuid samples such as blood serum using ﬂow cytometry with ﬂuorescent dyed-labelling analytes in immunoassays (Jett et al. 1985). It
is essential to monitor the lunar base environment through miniaturized ﬂow cytometry and DNA assays (Cohen et al. 2008). Flow
cytometry requires sampled biological cells (microbial load, blood
samples, urine, mucus, etc.) to be pre-stained with ﬂuorescent molecules. It involves passing a laser signal through the stained cell
suspension with a ﬁltered photomultiplier measuring the ﬂuorescent response of the cells. Filters allow light intensity measurements at different wavelengths. A variety of stains are possible
depending on the cellular properties to be investigated. DNA assay
implements microﬂuidic lab-on-a-chip diagnostics based on optical
readout-based microarrays with automated polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ampliﬁcation. Substitution of optical readout with
microcantilever arrays eliminates the requirement for ﬂuorescent
labelling (also applicable to protein array technology). However,
DNA may be more appropriately sequenced using nanopore technology (Lu et al. 2016). Proteomics is also an essential complement
to genomics as the two are coupled but not through a one-to-one
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

664

mapping (Weston and Hood 2004). Electrophoresis or liquid chromatography with surface enhanced laser desorption/ionization
time-of-ﬂight (SELDI-TOF) mass spectrometry is used in proteomics
for protein biomarker diagnostics. Protein microarrays such as
immobilized antibody arrays provide protein proﬁling in which
arrays of different antibodies can detect speciﬁc antigens. Protein
arrays are much more challenging than DNA arrays as there is no
protein equivalent to PCR and proteins are highly variable in their
properties and are much less stable than DNA.
(iii) A wardroom with galley is where the habitat crew congregate
socially to eat together at mealtimes, bond and prevent cliques
from forming. The galley must be equipped with a range of food
preparation machines (Perchonok et al. 2012) — oil press for
extracting peanut or soya oil, breadmaker for processing wheat,
tofu/soyamilk maker for processing soyabean, extruder, grinding
mill, food processor/blender, microwave oven, convection oven,
centrifuge, refrigerator/freezer for organic material storage including food (and medical samples), autoclave for cleaning utensils and
3D food printers for food preparation. Heating units, refrigerator
and freezer required for medical applications are included as part
of the galley.
(iv) Individual or communal private quarters include bed, desk
and storage and should be located at the extrema of the conﬁguration away from work areas.
(v) Laboratory facilities for scientiﬁc and engineering analysis
with scientiﬁc instruments typical of planetary exploration. Laboratory facilities will require gloveboxes, vented fume cupboard
and clean sterilization areas with pipette delivery systems. Scientiﬁc analysis tools (Gronstal et al. 2007) include sample acquisition, preparation and processing tools, imaging cameras (UV to
IR for mineralogical analysis), close-up imager, quartz microbalance, thermometers, pH meters, UV ﬁlter microscope with slides
and microbiological dyes, petrographic microscope with thin section saw, confocal microscopy, scanning electron microscopy,
atomic force microscopy, radiation monitors, neutron spectrometry,
gamma-ray spectrometry, X-ray diffraction/reﬂectance spectrometry,
Raman spectrometry, laser plasma spectrometry, isotope-mass spectrometry, seismometry, thermal measurement probes and bevameters. All instruments may be connected to a handheld tablet/
laptop with imaging camera.
(vi) A desirable optional feature is support for local robotic lunar
telescopes especially on the farside or poles. Gamma ray, X-ray,
ultraviolet, optical, infrared, submillimetre, microwave, and radio
telescopy are possible (particularly for out-of-the-ecliptic viewing),
but far-infrared/submillimetre, microwave and interferometry are
the most favoured options at the farside. Earth orbit is adequate for
gamma and X-ray telescopes; ultraviolet telescopy is in decline;
optical/infrared is implemented at Sun-Earth L2; far infraredsubmillimetre is the most information-rich region of telescopy
for both cosmology, early galactic-stellar-molecular astrophysics and
the Moon offers a radio-quiet location for activities such as SETI
and a large stable platform for near infrared interferometric planet
imaging.
(vii) Computing facilities for multiple uses — real-time monitoring and control of lunar base systems (though this is a bridge
function), scientiﬁc and engineering analysis, and teleoperative
control of robotic vehicles and imaging cameras.
(viii) Communications system for local and Moon-Earth information
trunks will require radiofrequency antenna towers linked either by
radiowave or underground/overground electrical data cabling —
antennas are required for communications to Earth. There is the
possibility of exploiting similar technologies to generate microwave
energy for remote energy transmission and (or) for lunar regolith
beneﬁciation.
(ix) Robotic workshop and tooling systems to support all nonmanual operations within and without the lunar base. All equipment must be inspected, maintained, serviced, calibrated and
repaired. The workshop includes small, powered hand-tools for

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

simple manual bolt exchange and repair, and workshop-based
saws, drills, milling, turning and 3D printing facilities (fab-lab)
for major repairs and construction of jigs. Some typical parts that
may be 3D printed include clamps, bolts/nuts, manifolds, tools,
and containers; however, the size of a full catalogue of lunar base
parts can be controlled using a limited number of standardized
families of parts that can be re-used in many diverse applications.
This is the same philosophy behind the modular spacecraft concept such as NASA’s multimission modular spacecraft capable of
reconﬁguration. The test case of the value of this approach was
the Solar Maximum Repair Mission (1984) which comprised two
main repairs: (a) replacement of a designed-for-servicing attitude
control module involved 4 simple single-bolt exchanges (Davis
1987); (b) replacement of a not-designed-for-servicing main electronics box involved exchanging 14  10-32 non-capture screws, 4 
10-32 captive cap screws, and 22  4-40 slotted head connector
screws (Adams et al. 1987). Clearly, standardization and modularity
will be essential for maintainability and, by implication, initial construction. The initial construction machines are used for the maintenance and repair of the constructed products.
(x) All human bases are required to serve exploration missions
with rover traverses for ﬁeld surveying over challenging terrain
being essential. Fleet of robotic electrically-powered vehicles/
trains of various capacities from small autonomous surveying
rovers to long-range fully pressurized human-rated vehicles are
required for exploration, surveying and transport of material,
equipment, and people. All, including human-rated rovers, should be
teleoperable from the lunar base through UHF link. The large rovers
are essentially mobile habitats for two astronauts for 14 days with an
average traverse speed of 20 km/h giving a daily range of 160 km
over 8 h or 480 km over 24 h. Each human-rated rover must be
equipped with a robotic manipulator for payload handling, a
winch for self-towing, a towbar for hauling a trailer. Drawbar pull
is generated only by powered wheels. The inclusion of trailers provides a ﬂexible means for adding greater hauling capabilities
(though unpowered trailers do not contribute to rover drawbar
pull). Although human-rated rovers reduce the requirement for
EVA, it does not eliminate it. The simplest mode of EVA is to
depressurize the rover after the personnel have donned their EVA
suits. An airlock to the pressurized compartment reduces air losses.
Alternatively, suitports may be used in which EVA suits are mounted
to ports on the rover. Once the astronaut has entered the suit,
another astronaut seals the port. All rovers must be modular
to ensure interchangeability of parts, e.g., our Kapvik microrover
sported a modular change-out chassis (Setterﬁeld et al. 2014). All
human handling for changeout must involve common EVA interfacing protocols, e.g., ESA (1995). Connector plugs must require no more
than a single-handed single-turn to disconnect, and any connector
installation/removal tool must not contact adjacent connectors —
this requires a minimum of 40 mm between rows of connectors and
64 mm between staggered rows of connectors.
(xi) Cargo-handling facilities are required for loading and unloading transported materials input-output to the lunar base — this
involves cranes for packaged material or LHD (load-haul-dump)
vehicles for raw material. The latter are also workhorses for mining operations suggesting a natural evolution towards mining
facilities.
(xii) Launchpad facilities must be co-located to the lunar base for
Earth-Moon supply and transport route for cargo and (or) personnel. Currently, it is assumed that local water ice from the south
pole will be mined, split into hydrogen and oxygen for cryogenic
storage. Liquid hydrogen storage requires actively-maintained
cryogenic temperatures below 20 K and typically self-leak at a
rate of 3%/day, i.e., 100% loss in 30 days. The cryogenic propellant
must be transported to the launch pad which must be at least
0.5 km away from the habitation area to prevent dust contamination
by the rocket exhaust plumes. An alternative is electromagnetic
launchers for Moon-to-orbit launch of cargo (McNab 2003) which
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

do not generate plumes — this trades renewable electric power
against the combustion of ﬁnite lunar volatiles.
(xiii) A lunar base supporting 6–8 personnel requires 200–300 kW
of power, but this does not include ISRU activities which will
require power levels MW depending on the ISRU processes
adopted. In a near-equatorial location, the base will have access
to solar energy generation at 1360 W/m2 during the 14-day lunar
day and require stored energy to consume during the 14-day
lunar night. This may be supplied through solar energy generation during the lunar day and energy storage during the lunar
night from which areal calculations may be estimated based on
energy conversion efﬁciency. A solar cell farm with an output of
500 kW with 20% efﬁciency would require an areal coverage of
almost 4000 m2 including night-time storage. Nuclear reactors
such as a nuclear ﬁssion Brayton cycle reactor offer both energy
generation and storage simultaneously but locating, mining, and
reﬁning ﬁssile fuel would not be feasible on the Moon. During
the lunar night, thermal insulation and electrical heating will be
essential for the lunar base. During the lunar day, heat rejection
will be necessary using thermal radiators. Radiating surfaces are
typically aluminium louvres which can reject heat at 250 W/m2
by radiation during the lunar day. At peaks of eternal light at the
poles, solar power can be generated through most of the lunar
day-night cycle. Electrical power generation, storage and distribution may be centralized and (or) distributed. All mining and
manufacturing processes require large amounts of energy far
exceeding that required by the lunar base. Solar photovoltaic
arrays are generally assumed but there are alternatives — the
problem of p-n junction doping of photovoltaics on the Moon is
usually not addressed, yet it is crucial to in situ manufactured
solar cell performances which are usually poor. Nuclear reactor
systems are generally favoured for their sun-independence, providing energy generation continuously day and night though it
exacerbates the heat rejection problem during the lunar day. A
small number of crew can be supported by a 30 kW nuclear reactor. However, space nuclear power sources are not being developed and the exotic materials that they require cannot be readily
sourced locally. We address construction of power generation
and storage from in situ resources in the next section.
(xiv) Sickbay facilities are essential to support human health and
in particular the treatment of trauma due to accidents. Telemedicine increases medical autonomy of crews by providing the capability for remote medical communication and intervention from
Earth through remote diagnosis (Grigoriev et al. 1997). All sickbays must include basic medical equipment – stretcher/trolley,
operating table, infection control equipment, deﬁbrillator, anaesthesia machine with ventilator, patient monitor (blood pressure
thermometer, pulse oximeter), ECG/EEG machines, ﬁbreoptic endoscope, surgical lamps, blanket warmers, suction pumps, and electrosurgical unit. Autoclave, microcentrifuge, histological microscopes,
PCR reactor, lab-on-a-chip biochip microarrays will be included as
part of standard medical analysis facilities but many of the scientiﬁc instruments may have applications in space medical research
as well as biomedical monitoring. Home-operated medical equipment for outpatients, dominated by respiratory support devices,
kidney dialysis machines, oxygen therapy, insulin pumps, and infusion therapy, illustrate the potential for non-expert medical care
(ten Haken et al. 2018). Miniature production of pharmaceuticals
such Bio-MOD (medications-on-demand) is based on a compact modular system of devices driven by a pump (Arnold 2019). A replaceable
cassette containing freeze-dried DNA, RNA, enzymes, cell extracts,
and other biomolecules is incubated in a small temperaturecontrolled incubator-shaker to produce proteins. The cassette
contents are then extracted and mixed in an extractor/mixer
with solutions to separate the drug. Syringes inject buffering
solution to wash the drug as it passes through purifying and
polishing columns. The purity of the drug is monitored by a UV
absorbence sensor <0.1% impurities. Suitable pioneer drugs include

665

the antihistamine diphrenylhydramine, the anaesthetic lidocaine,
the sedative diazepam, the antidepressant ﬂuoxetine and the antibiotic ciproﬂoxacin. The analgesic acetaminophen may be produced by engineered Synechocystis sp PCC 6803 in culture from
acetate. Live yeast such as Pichia pastoris can be engineered to produce drugs suitable for humans. Other techniques may be adaptable to pharmaceutical production. 3D printing has been used to
print drug delivery systems encapsulated in synthetic polymers
with accurate, controlled release characteristics (Yu et al. 2008).
Machine learning algorithms may be employed to search the
Suzuki-Miyaura space of chemical reactions for organic synthesis
as a step toward automated organic chemistry through small scale
experimentation with real-time monitoring by infrared spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (Granda et al. 2018). More complex equipment such as
ultrasonic imagers, CT scanners and MRI imagers will be standard medical diagnostic tools. CT imaging is based on the variable
absorption of X-rays by different tissues; MRI is based on nuclear
magnetic resonance in which nuclei align themselves with an
applied magnetic ﬁeld with the emission of radiofrequency. In
both cases, tomographic reconstruction produces 2D cross sectional images. Advanced trauma life support (treatment of airway obstruction, haemorrhaging, haemothorax and pneumothorax
care) and advanced cardiac life support implemented on ISS permits
medical evacuation within 24 h, an option unavailable to lunar
base personnel (Drudi et al. 2012). This suggests that surgical
intervention may be essential in the event of accidents which are
likely given the hazardous environment and demanding astronaut
task lists. Anaesthesia and surgery require skilled intervention
which must be conducted by EMT-trained crew with on-site robotic
surgery under cramped conditions (Houtchens 1993). For anaesthesia, barbiturate and ketamine-based intravenous infusion supplemented with narcotic bolus is favoured over epidural nerve blocking
(Ball et al. 2010) (although gas is disfavoured, nitrous oxide is safe
and simple to manufacture from urea, nitric acid and sulphuric
acid: 2(NH3)2CO + 2HNO3 + H2SO4 ! 2 N2O + 2CO2 + (NH4)2SO4 +
2H2O). Intravenous anaesthesia is reckoned to be safer than spinal
anaesthesia due to microgravity ﬂuid distribution (but the effect
is diminished under lunar gravity). Blood released during surgery
would form domes around the bleeding tissues due to surface tension which can be controlled with sponges and cauterization (diminished under lunar gravity). Internal organs tend to ﬂoat if exposed
under microgravity (diminished under lunar gravity). Telemedicine,
a medicine practiced from a distance, will be a key capability in the
delivery of surgical services (Haidegger and Benyo 2008). We assume
that simple scientiﬁc and medical tools may be manufactured in
situ through 3D printing but that complex diagnostic and robotic
equipment must be imported from Earth.
(xv) Airlocks or suitports are required at multiple locations to
support ingress/egress of people for extravehicular activity (EVA).
Backup EVA suits are critical but certain critical safety issues
must be addressed (Trembley 1994): (a) loss of carbon dioxide removal and cooling capability; (b) external leakage of oxygen; (c) suit
overpressurisation; (d) rupture of pressurised oxygen bottles; (e) loss
of primary oxygen supply; ( f) oxygen ﬁre; (g) LiOH dust in ventilation loop; (h) helmet fogging from dehumidiﬁcation failure;
(i) free water in suit; (j) decompression sickness. Internal gas
pressure favours low cabin pressure with higher oxygen content
to reduce buffering gases, minimize leakages and reduce EVA
pre-breathing requirements. The Space Shuttle dictated two major
protocols, the latter being subdivided into two options: (a) for
14.7 psi cabin pressure, 4 h of suit prebreathe was required; (b) for
10.2 psi exposure for 24 h, a 40 min suit prebreathe was required;
(c) for 10.2 psi cabin pressure exposure for 12 h, a 75 min pre-breathe
was required. Prior to the cabin depressurization to 10.2 psi, a 1 h
mask prebreathe was required. The airlock must therefore implement pre-breathe protocols. EVA excursions will also be required
from the pressurized rover as well as operating teleoperated microPublished by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

666

rovers deployed from the pressurized rover. The former involves
potential hazards that should be minimized using the latter. The
suitport eliminates the requirement for airlocks by externally
mounting spacesuits on the habitat for EVA. Crewmembers climb
into the back of the suit from an internal entry and then detach.
However, the use of suitports require the astronaut to be able-bodied
to step back through the port so injury might cause difﬁculty. At least
one airlock is required with dust mitigation facilities to prevent
interior dust contamination while minimizing air loss (nominally
10% losses) — a water spray can remove dust. EVA suits are rigid
cocoons with only partial ﬂexibility at the joints limiting astronaut posture. This makes EVA physically and mentally demanding. There are circumstances when astronauts may be required
for longer and more demanding EVA excursions such as during
habitat construction, upgrading, servicing and repair. The EVA
suit may be augmented with exoskeleton gloves armed with force
sensors and actuators to provide assistive capabilities to the astronaut to compensate for the high stiffness of pressurized suits
(Matheson and Brooker 2012).
(xvi) Personal and base hygiene devices — air ﬁltration to remove
lunar dust, personal cleaning facilities, vacuum cleaners for removing dust and dirt and washer/dryers for cleaning textiles. Lunar dust
is a ubiquitous problem and it can be extremely damaging for human
health — seals/gaskets, moving parts and optical components are
particularly susceptible to dust invasion (Kruzelecky et al. 2011).

7. Contribution of in situ resources to lunar habitats
We propose a fundamental list of basic universal materials
required to leverage an entire extraterrestrial infrastructure (except
the compressive structures considered earlier) extracted from a
handful of lunar minerals (ilmenite, anorthite, orthoclase, olivine
and pyroxene), asteroidal material (nickel-iron-cobalt-tungstenselenium metal) and regolith volatiles (water and carbonaceousnitrogenous-sulphurous gases): (i) wrought (pure) iron for tensile
structures; (ii) tool steel (iron and tungsten alloy with small amounts
of carbon) for subtractive manufacturing tools; (iii) electrical steel
(iron and silicon alloy) for magnetically soft rotors; (iv) ferrite
(cobalt-iron oxide) for permanent magnet stators; (v) permalloy
(iron and nickel alloy) for magnetic shielding; (vi) kovar (iron,
nickel and cobalt alloy with minor amounts of silicon and carbon) for high temperature electrical wiring; (vii) silicone plastic/
oils from syngas for elastomeric electrical insulation; (viii) nickel
for anodic/control grid electrodes and electrical wiring; (ix) tungsten for cathodic electrodes; (x) fused silica glass for transparent
optical components such as optical ﬁbres and solar concentrators; (xi) alumina as high temperature ceramics for kiln linings;
(xii) silica for thermal insulation and pressure-sensitive quartz
sensors; (xiii) quicklime for cathode coatings; (xiv) aluminium for
electrical wiring and tensile structures; (xv) selenium for photonsensitive sensing and imaging; (xvi) water as a hydrogen source
for silicone manufacture; (xvii) silicate/oxide minerals as a general oxygen source; (xviii) kaolinite/porcelain as a ceramic matrix
for soft magnets, electric motors, transformers and electrical
insulation.
The manufacture of these functional materials comprise our
lunar industrial ecosystem (see Appendix A) which describes all
required thermochemical–electrical processes required to build
and support an industrial infrastructure. All mineral oxides can
be reduced to high purity metals using the Metalysis FFC process
(Ellery et al. 2017). Our industrial ecology follows the principle
that Earth-imported reagents that are recycled are favoured over
those that are consumed (Waldron 1988) — in this case, NaCl salt
which is required as a recycled reagent. Sodium in the form of
bytownite, a minor plagioclase mineral, is more abundant in lunar
highlands than the mare regions but it is highly depleted by an order
of magnitude in comparison to Earth. Apatite Ca5(PO4)3(F,Cl,OH) is
common mineral grain in lunar mare basalt and is the main carrier

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

of Cl and F with a concentration of 1000–5000 ppm typical in apatite
grains but Cl is required in quantities sufﬁcient to justify its import
from Earth (though it is recycled as a reagent rather than consumed
as a product — it is crucial as HCl for pre-processing lunar minerals
through artiﬁcial chemical weathering). Hence, NaCl is imported
from Earth as a recycled reagent.
We focus here on how these lunar resource-derived materials
can be employed to construct speciﬁc systems required for a
lunar base. We have addressed elsewhere how lunar in situ resources may be leveraged to construct mechatronic components to construct robotic machines (Ellery 2016). Robotic machines comprise
the means of production for leveraging a lunar base from in situ
resources. Mining and manufacturing facilities (metals, plastics,
glasses, ceramics and volatiles) including robots (including their
cartesian variant – 3D printers) are essential for ISRU including for
on-site supply of spares and component repair using 3D printing
and recycling of waste material. The lunar base must be designed to
ensure that materials are readily separable for recyclability so the
base can be re-customized ad inﬁnitum. Foundries must be automated
and regulated. For example, a CVD (chemical vapour deposition) tube
furnace system, Robofurnace, has demonstrated semi-autonomous
thin ﬁlm manufacture (Oliver et al. 2013). In general, the key to
automation is the sensor suite to provide observability with
closed loop control — thermochemical processing will require a
distributed set of temperature control, pressure control and gas
detection systems. Lunar material-derived compressive load-bearing
constructions require manufacturing facilities (regolith-derived
material, cast basalt, glass, etc.) supported by civil construction
equipment including cranes, bricklaying machines, and 3D printers.
Similar paving machines are required for site preparation and road
construction - the same paving robots provide for both construction
of roadways and foundations and their maintenance and repair.
Surface roadways for transport may be paved or railed which
require robotic rovers to deploy. Subsurface facilities are favoured
for physical and thermal protection, especially for utility piping
and storage facilities, e.g., lava tubes. Subway tunnels may be
implemented as an alternative, safer mode of transport for people between modules (minimizing airlocks) over surface roadways. Subways are also used in several types of subsurface mines —
subways are generally railed. Subways tunnels must be constructed
by tunnel boring (drilling) machines with railway tracks laid for
subway carriages. 3D printing or sintering a borehole lining as
drilling proceeds can protect against borehole collapse. All infrastructure (roadways, electrical cabling, pipelines, etc.) and all
equipment must be maintained and repaired serving all aspects
of the lunar base — this should be accomplished remotely robotically. Furthermore, maintenance and repair must be undertaken
assuming minimal stock of spare parts to minimize wastage
imposed by warehousing. This implies that spare parts must be
manufactured on demand in situ. Robotic leverage will be key to
the construction and maintenance of lunar bases.
The lunar base power system must also be leveraged from in
situ resources. Direct thermal power generation is essential for
physico-chemical processing of raw material — this is likely to be
generated locally at demand due to the inefﬁciency of thermal
pipelining and even greater inefﬁciency of solar-electrical-thermal
conversion. Thermionic conversion from solar concentrators
represents a promising technique because of its compatibility
with thermal sources by solar concentrators required for their
in situ manufacture (Ellery 2019). Waste heat from the conversion
process can be exploited for space heating rather than radiated to
space — typically, approximately 50% of waste heat could be recovered, stored and transmitted as hot water. Electrical energy storage
during the two-week lunar night is a challenge — large battery or
supercapacitor banks are not feasible but rechargeable fuel cells
and ﬂywheels are options. Flywheels in particular are attractive for
their favourable characteristics of manufacturability from in situ
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

resources (Ellery 2019). They may be installed below ground for
safety.
Here, we focus on the construction of electrical cabling, water
pipes and air ducts — these will require the excavation of cavities
or the ability to 3D print such cavities in wall-ceiling-ﬂoor structures for piping/cabling and other prefabricated units. The nominal power rating for a spacecraft is 28 V DC but the ISS generates
160 V DC for electrical power distribution over a larger area.
Higher voltage distribution over distances beyond 100 m require
AC transmission as used terrestrially, a common choice being
240 V AC at 60 Hz. Underground/overground electrical power cabling will be required to distribute electrical energy to multiple
demands. Electrical cabling will require metal (aluminium) conductors that are integrated within an electrically insulated structure. Electric power cables comprise arrays of conducting wires
with multiple layers of protective ﬂexible insulation. Bare wiring
and cabling may be buried in regolith which itself provides electrical insulation but this does not accommodate wiring interior
to the habitat. The most appropriate form of electrical wiring for
a lunar base manufactured from lunar resources is knob-andtube wiring. The porcelain conduits prevent conduction
between the conductor and the structural material with which it
might react (aluminium metal reacts with alkalis in cement). Knoband-tube wiring may comprise of single-insulated aluminium conductors running within wall/ceiling cavities using protective insulating tubes of porcelain through which wire is passed. The wires
may be wrapped in ﬁbreglass cloth. The porcelain tubes are supported periodically by cylindrical porcelain knobs nailed to walls
or ceilings. Porcelain bushings, junction structures and other
standoffs may also be used for more complex connections using
ﬁbreglass cloth to provide ﬂexible insulation for damping. Porcelain is a ceramic material formed through ﬁring kaolin (china
clay) — a paste rich in kaolinite but including feldspar and
quartz — in a kiln up to 1400 °C (both of which are derived from
lunar resources). Once ﬁred, it has high corrosion-resistance,
electrically insulating to high voltages and resistant to thermal
shock. Knob-and-tube wiring is robust and safe.
Life support systems are required to support human life in the
lunar habitat at multiple locations including the supply and regulation of air, moisture, temperature, and pressure. This requires
pumped air circulation and sensor arrays. Temperature control
requires distributed heating (thermal radiators) and cooling (ﬂuid
circulant) systems which impose convection currents that must
be exploited for thermal control. Air ducts are typically metallic usually aluminum alloy - which provides a protective oxide layer
but non-rusting stainless steel is a possibility. Silicone plastic is
unsuitable as a sealant coating as it is permeable to gases though
it is impermeable to liquids. Fluid handling in general is an important aspect of ISRU involving sedimentation, lubrication, heat
transfer and pumping. Even unit chemical processors are reactor
cavities in which motorized pumps maintain the ﬂow of reagents/
products. Motorized pumps control the ﬂow of ﬂuids through
pipes and ducts. Pneumatic conveyance of material in a pipeline is determined by the minimum “saltation” velocity (Sullivan
et al. 1994):
pﬃﬃ
ð4Þ
vs ¼ 14:77 m 0:375 g
where m = solid/gas ﬂow ratio dependent on gas pressure. This
implies that saltation velocity decreases somewhat with reduced g.
Water supply may be mined from water ice with oxygen supplied from oxide mineral extraction. Water must be piped to
multiple demand sites — this includes domestic and industrial
uses but must be regulated as a scarce resource. Similarly, sewage
waste must be collected from multiple distributed toilet locations, piped with water and processed to extract water for recycling and to produce solid manure for agriculture. A plumbing
system of water/sewage pipes with valves and regulators is

667

required where multiple pipe segments must be connected but
allow access by robotic pigs for maintenance and repair of leaks.
They must incorporate pumps and valves to control pressure and
drive water transport from water storage tanks. Engineering piping is typically designed to minimize construction costs so pumps
must be powerful to drive ﬂuids through their small cross section.
Biological systems minimize pumping energy so pipe cross sections are optimized. Hence, there is a trade between material and
energy (both manufacturing and operational) that must be determined. Cast iron or stainless steel pressurized water pipes are durable and leak-free. Water pipes will require silicone plastic or cast
basalt interior for water sealing. Lunar regolith offers high thermal
insulation which may be exploited by burying water piping and
water storage tanks supported by pumps. Reduced gravity reduces
buoyancy-driven convection and sedimentation but under lunar
gravity conditions, diffusion will not become dominant as the primary mechanism for ﬂuid mixing (as it would be under microgravity conditions). The reduction in convection is not as severe as in
the microgravity environment but may nevertheless require compensation through capillary effects and (or) active ﬂuid pumping.
Under partial gravity conditions, ﬂuids exhibit special behaviours
(Ostrach 1982). Fluids are subjected to buoyancy-driven convection
but there is a balance between buoyancy and viscous forces that
yield ﬂuid velocities determined by different regimes:
 
b gDTL2
y
for Gr  1 and Ra  1
¼ Gr
V¼
y
L 
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ y
for Gr > 1 and Pr < 1
V ¼ b gDTL ¼ Gr
ð5Þ
L
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
b gDTL
Gr y
V ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃ ¼
for Gr > 1 and Pr > 1
Pr L
Pr
where L = characteristic length, b = volumetric expansion coefb gDTL3
= Grashof number (buoyancy term), Ra =
ﬁcient, Gr ¼
y2
cp
g cv m
= Prandtl number, g ¼ =
PrGr = Rayleigh number, Pr ¼
k
cv
ratio of speciﬁc heats. Under low gravity conditions, there are
increasingly inﬂuential surface tension gradients such as Marangoni convection. Marangoni instability occurs when there is
a gradient of surface tension at interfaces analogous to buoyancy gradients generating complex thermocapillary convective
ﬂuid ﬂow patterns. Under low gravity conditions, the relative
importance of gravity to surface tension quantiﬁed by the Bond
%gL2
is reduced where r = ﬂuid density, L = characnumber Bo ¼
s
teristic dimension, s = surface tension. On Earth, gravity suppresses surface tension except under conﬁgurations of very small
dimensions. Marangoni number is given by Ma = PrRe deﬁning ther 2
D
mocapillary ﬂow. For viscous ﬂow, Re
 1 where D = perpenL
dicular length scale to L due to negligible inertia so surface tension
GrAr
gL3 r 0 D%
is dominant with
¼ Bo b DT where Ar ¼
= ArchiRe
m2
medes number due to density differences. Velocity of Marangoni
convective turn-over is given by:
ð6Þ

v¼

 
2 ma 1=3
L Pr

where  = viscosity, m = convecting mass, Pr = Prandtl number.
Wetting due to contact angle at solid/ﬂuid interfaces such as
pipes is also affected by the gravity ﬁeld. Diffusion as mass transfer of a ﬂuid induced by a concentration gradient may also be
affected by gravity. Water ﬁltration may be achieved with permeable (unglazed) porcelain ﬁlters that exclude any microbes above
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

668

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

0.2 lm in size. The Chamberlain ﬁlter is an inner porcelain pipe
sleeve through which outer pipe water percolates to yield ﬁltered
water within the sleeve. Similar issues apply to chemical reactors
as the core of a chemical plant that converts raw material into a
ﬁnal product. They usually involve multiple phases of material:
gases, liquids and (or) solids that require different handling mechanisms. Networks of reactors are connected by piping to convey
streams of ﬂuids, slurries or gases between them. These transport
processes involve the transfer of mass, momentum, and heat.
Internal aspects of habitation and other modules such as furnishings for human comfort and aesthetics have not been addressed
before. Individual quarters provide privacy and the opportunity
for personal intervention. Individual and cultural tastes vary in
the attribution of beauty and style and may be expressed through
interior decoration within the living spaces of their habitat to prevent monotony. Internal decorative ﬂowers that provide life, colour and beauty will be essential. The ornamental French marigold
plant Tagetes patula has been grown on a terrestrial anorthosite analogue substrate using microbial communities including Bacillus
species to release metal ions (Kozyrovska et al. 2006). All furniture
must be designed to accommodate reduced gravity conditions.
Reduced gravity has a debilitating effect on bone and muscle metabolism necessitating extensive exercise facilities. Roombots is a
concept in which building blocks may self-assemble into mobile
furniture which locomote on the basis of neural net-based central
pattern generators (Sproewitz et al. 2009). Each truncated spherical
Roombot module comprises three motorized joints with a high
gear ratio gearbox including a diametric axis, an independent controller and slip-rings for electrical energy supply. Active mechanical connectors provide robust but reversible attachment between
modules. However, we assume that furnishings will take a more
traditional form. There is no reason that furnishings cannot exhibit
the warmth of a Victorian reading room rather than the starkness
of a submarine cabin.
Drywall is gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O) plaster which may be mixed
with ﬁbreglass. Hydrated gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O) plaster mixed
with glass ﬁbre can be sandwiched between ﬁbreglass mats to
form plasterboard for internal walls and ceilings; however, sulphur
is not plentiful but must be husbanded. Kaolinite (and other) clays
that constitute the waste products of the lunar industrial ecosystem (Appendix A) may be used sun-dried as plaster. Cement, as discussed earlier, is preferential to clay for its greater hardness and
may be employed as mortar with regolith and water. Sodium silicate (Na2SiO3) — waterglass — has multiple uses as a binder, as
high temperature insulation, as an adhesive, a ﬂocculant in colloids and in the production of silica gel. It is manufactured from
caustic soda and silica with hot steam in a reactor (though sodium
must be imported from Earth):
2NaOH þ SiO2 ! ðNa2 OÞx SiO2 þ xH2 O
Sodium silicate is often used with vermiculite or perlite for a
wide range of uses. Perlite and vermiculate are lightweight refractory materials that can be moulded into ﬁreproof insulation
and wallplaster or mixed with Portland or other cement for lightweight rooﬁng and ﬂooring. Vermiculite is a hydrous phyllosilicate clay used as a growing medium in soilless hydroponics due
to its retention of air, water, and nutrients. Artiﬁcial forms of vermiculite or perlite may potentially be manufactured from lunar
resources: artiﬁcial perlite may be formed from lunar glass comprising 70%–75% silica and 12%–15% alumina with other metal
oxide constituents impregnated by 3%–5% water; expanded
vermiculite-like clays may be formed through heating lunar
mineral-derived clays in a rotary kiln to 1200 °C in which released
gas bubbles — primarily water — form a honeycomb structure. Natural materials should be emulated such as walnut dashboards for
consoles, porcelain (vitriﬁed kaolin) tile ﬂooring (including classical
black diamond in white patterns or wood-like effects), faux wood-

like polylactic acid (derived from corn starch) panelling on walls and
wood-look painted furniture. The garden carpet is a woollen ﬂoor
covering depicting a bird’s eye view of a Persian garden with highly
styled arrangements of a central island within a water stream with
typically four tributaries dividing the carpet into four quadrants
surrounded by a tree-lined perimeter and the garden populated
with shrubs, ﬂowers, ﬁsh, birds, and animals. Garden carpets can
be transplanted anywhere and they served to beautify nomadic
tents throughout the Middle East becoming more stylized and variable in design over time under Islamic inﬂuence but retaining their
ﬂoral motifs. Although wool is impractical for a lunar base, silk
from silkworm is feasible but requires large-scale production for
textile carpets as a possibility.
Coloured paints may be manufactured from local resources —
ochre is a mixture of clay and haematite offering colours from
mustard yellow to earthy red, both products are within the lunar
industrial ecosystem (Appendix A). The addition of small amounts
of manganese oxide, if it can be sourced (but not part of our industrial infrastructure), provides sienna, a browner hue. These colours
are natural earthy colours. Other pigments that may be sourced
locally include white (TiO2) and black (Ti2O3) derived from ilmenite.
Egyptian blue CaCuSiO4O10 may be manufactured from heating
hydrated copper carbonate, quartz sand, calcium carbonate and a
small amount of natron (mixture of hydrated soda ash and baking
soda):
Cu2 CO3 ðOHÞ2 þ 8SiO2 þ 2CaCO3 ! 2CaCuSi4 O10 þ 3CO2 þ H2 O

However, copper is rare on the Moon eliminating this form of
blue pigment. However, cobalt blue may be manufactured by sintering cobalt oxide with alumina at 1200 °C to form CoAl2O4. If
Cr2O3 can be sourced (chromite is relatively abundant on the
Moon but does not form part of our lunar industrial ecology as its
extraction would impose signiﬁcantly greater complexity), then
this provides green but this may otherwise be created by mixing
cobalt blue with yellow ochre. Walls may be painted earthy brickred/burnt-orange in relaxation areas contrasting with colder blue/
green (such as teal) in work areas, earthy green or blue in the galley
and sterile off-whites (such as haematite-tinged battleship grey)
to reduce glare in the sickbay and laboratories to demonstrate
cleanliness.
External views of the monotonous planetary environment may
be substituted by polymeric wallpaper or screens displaying seasonal, mountainous, forest and coastal views and noises for stimulation and (or) relaxation. A common arrangement for living
areas has been the relationship between building and garden. This
illustrates the importance of one or more greenhouses. In the
broader context of the Moon Village, an inspiration might be the
garden city design. Gardens are not a luxury but a necessity —
the garden city movement in urban planning combined town and
country elements and was initiated by Sir Ebenezer Howard in
1898 inspired by Edward Bellamy’s novel Looking Backward 2000–
1887 (1888). The garden city was based on self-contained urban communities surrounded by greenbelts for agriculture and public
parks with radial boulevards for high sustainability. The most representative examples of the garden cities are Letchworth (1899)
and Welwyn (1919) garden cities both in Hertfordshire UK, but
it evolved into the New Town movement including modernistic
variants like Milton Keynes (1967) in Buckinghamshire. Lunar bases
must incorporate gardens into their functionality.
A variety of potteries can be manufactured in situ from lunar
resources. Porcelain is formed by heating kaolinite to 1200–1400 °C.
Although invented in ancient China, Chinese porcelain characterized by its blue-and-white wares was exported via the Silk Road by
the Ming dynasty to Renaissance Europe. English bone china is a
variant of porcelain that includes 50% bone ash (with its high CaO
content) developed in 1748 to compete with Chinese porcelain
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

669

culminating in the beautiful Royal Crown Derby, Spode, and
Wedgewood bone china wares. Underglazing prior to ﬁring had
traditionally been limited to cobalt blue yielding the traditional blue and white porcelain. More decorative overglazing
post ﬁring involves the use of vitreous enamel formed by fusing
powdered glass mixed with pigments at 750–850 °C for a greater
range of colours. Although it is unlikely that extraterrestrial
resources could be returned to Earth (Craig et al. 2014), perhaps,
the next evolution in porcelain products will be high-value
wares constructed from lunar minerals and imported back to
Earth with returning astronauts.
Soft furnishing and climbing vine vegetation on walls reduce
acoustic noise from rotating machinery. Soft furnishing may be
provided as a byproduct of an agricultural facility from silkworms
(edible protein source) and hemp (which has a wide range of uses
unlike cotton). Although tweed is usually woven from sheep’s wool,
tweed may be woven from plant ﬁbre such as hemp which has high
durability with a texture similar to that of cotton while exploiting
the earthy dye colours.
Self-cleaning of lunar dust and dirt in general in a lunar base
would be a highly desirable capability. Colloidal particles in
suspension can be excluded from hydrophilic surfaces such as
Naﬁon, a perﬂuorosulphonic ionomer comprising a polytetraﬂuoroethylene backbone with side groups terminated by sulphonate
ionic groups (Klyuzhin et al. 2008). Naﬁon exhibits a surface electrical potential of 160 mV and particles suspended in water solution
migrate away from such hydrophobic regions. The lotus (Nelumbo
nucifera) leaf exhibits a self-cleaning property by virtue of its nanostructured surface - its surface is covered in a variety of waxes forming self-assembled nanostructures which determine the surface’s
low wettability (hydrophobic). Hence, self-cleaning requires water
for its operation as it exploits the higher afﬁnity of particles for
water. Instead of Naﬁon, thin ﬁlms of silicone may be used as thin
ﬁlm coatings. Nanostructured surfaces comprising nano-hairs can
trap particles at their apices preventing particles from abrading
the surface. Nanoparticles of TiO2 (derived from lunar ilmenite)
have both hydrophobic and photocatalytic properties. It has applications in surface photocatalysis for UV light-assisted production
of water in the presence of ethylene or other organics (Fujishima
et al. 2008):
TiO2 þ C2 H4 þ 3O2 þ h ! TiO þ 2CO2 þ 2H2 O
TiO þ 1= 2 O2 ! TiO2
This is the basis of thin ﬁlm <20 lm TiO2 surface coatings decomposing organic contaminants in the presence of solar UV light as the
basis of self-cleaning and antifogging including disinfecting indoor
air and contaminated water (Fujishima et al. 2000). These technologies have yet to be explored in the context of lunar bases.

8. The selenic architectural style
If constructed from in situ materials, the design of lunar habitats will no longer be restricted to launch fairing volume constraints. Furthermore, local in situ materials introduce a wider
choice beyond traditional spacecraft aluminium alloy permitting
deeper exploration of architectural styles. Architecture attempts
to shape the landscape to human needs and desires for living and
working through the construction of buildings. Because the lunar
landscape is not natural for humans, we must shape it to resemble
our natural landscape on Earth but within the constraints imposed
by the Moon. Psychological stresses are chronic due to astronaut
isolation from the norms of human social life; astronauts experience extensive conﬁnement within the habitat imposed on them
by the need for protection against the hazards of radiation, micrometeorites, large temperature excursions, vacuum, dust, and
reduced gravity. We expect that most external explorations would
be conducted robotically to minimize the dangers of EVA sorties
which will increase their sense of conﬁnement. These psychological

considerations impose further requirements associated with
aesthetic.
Architectural design of space habitats must consider the psychological effects of long-duration spaceﬂight by contributing to
an ambience of well-being for the human occupants (Martinez
2007). The environment is experienced through the senses —
light intensity, colour, acoustics, smell, and texture. Light is the
most important calibrator of the human circadian clock which control the entire human metabolism; if it is out-of-kilter, it causes seasonal affective disorder (SAD) (Kolodziejczyk and Orzechowski 2016).
Windows represent structural weak points for crack initiation in the
structure, so natural light should be transmitted into and throughout the habitat via mirrors. Solar-like lighting and ambient colour
should follow circadian rhythms with a central skylight in each
module enabled by mirrors. Smell evokes strong associations, e.g.,
scented ﬂowers. Visual appeal is an obvious approach, e.g., walnut
dash can mellow the starkness of instrument panels. The green zone
is a state of experience that is harmonic with the environment. Nature is an important part of psychological experience through
plants and their arrangement in space and their association with
other aspects of the environment (Kaplan and Kaplan 1989). Mental health is enhanced by experience of the natural world as a
product of evolutionary psychology (Bratman et al. 2012) — this
is the biophilia hypothesis. Naturalistic landscapes such as gardens, meadows, trees, and waterways induce positive emotional
states and reduce cognitive stresses. Greenhouses may thus serve
an essential psychological function as well as physiological one in
closed ecological life support systems. As well as individual wellbring, social well-being must be maintained in minimizing conﬂict. Fine art, which includes architecture as well as painting and
sculpture, was the quest for beauty, and nature is the embodiment
of beauty. Humans evolved in grassland and savanna environments
inspiring landscape aesthetics such as John Constable’s paintings
of natural landscapes rather than dark satanic mills. Modern art
and architecture have become divorced from nature, devoid of its
fundamental quality. Decoration has been entirely omitted from
architecture due to the expense of craftsmanship. Modern massproduced architecture, found in every North American city,
is characterized by steel frames, concrete cladding, prefabricated
panels and extensive use of glass to minimize cost, and so, minimize
individuality. Enrico Dini envisages 3D printing re-introducing
decorative architecture at low cost (Dini E (2018) private communication). Perhaps 3D printed lunar bases can sport traditional
decorative features like balconies and balustrades, columns and
cornices, facades and fanlights, eaves and gables, pediments and
porticos, bays and oriels, columns, cornices, and mouldings. For
psychological reasons, it is essential to harmonize the artiﬁciality of the environment within a lunar base with naturalness and
beauty of form. Natural construction seeks to retain the elan vital
of the natural world in architecture through orderliness, growth
through deploying structures, sensibility to environmental conditions, and energy transduction and management (Gruber 2008). An
example is biomimicry as a natural architectural style that improves
ecological integration and balance regarding biological form, process
and ecosystem (Arslan 2014). Biological principles have also been
applied to environmental issues related to the wider urban infrastructure (Tarr 2002) — cities require many environmental inputs
and generate waste but must reach equilibrium with their environment to survive. They effectively metabolize land, air and water
which are subject to conﬂicts such as the conﬂict between clean air
and the requirement for energy.
Biomimicry-style architectures may be applied to reversible
deploying structures common in nature including folding/unfolding
(e.g., plant leaves, insect wings, ﬂower petals), rolling/unrolling (e.g.,
probosci, ovipositors) and tensegrity structures (Gruber et al. 2007).
Tensegrity is a structural engineering technique developed by Buckminster Fuller (Motro 2012; Yu et al. 2008). The extraction of speciﬁc
tensile (iron or aluminium) materials and compressive (ceramic)
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

670

materials from in situ resources introduces the possibility of
tensegrity-based structures. Tensegrity structures comprise lightweight conﬁgurations of compressive struts and tensile cables in
a balanced self-stressed state that is robust to perturbations. The
hallmark of tensegrity structures comprises prestressed tensile
cables enclosing compression bars in equilibrium thereby imparting
rigidity to the entire structure. Actuators may be implemented
to alter cable lengths to reconﬁgure the tensegrity structure,
say, from initial conﬁguration to its ﬁnal conﬁguration. The
point to note is that actuators are fundamentally involved in all
mechanical processes inherent in a lunar base. Of course, a space
habitat is not embedded with an ecosystem but implements an artiﬁcial one directly. Sustainability is a related ecosystem concept
that emphasizes our responsibility for stewardship of our environment. This has two interpretations: the pragmatic whereby sustainability relates to future human needs and the sacred whereby
sustainability has a theological, even pantheistic, foundation.
The use of bonded regolith and basalts permit compressive
structures such as bricks, columns, beams, arches, vaults, and
domes. Andrea Palladio’s Four Books of Architecture (1570) founded
the Palladian architectural movement that emphasized classical
Roman architectural forms including the inﬂuence of Vitruvius:
the ﬁrst book concentrated on the ﬁve classical orders and other
building elements; the second book discussed his own designs of
urban and country houses around Venice; the third book covered
city planning of streets, piazzas, and basilicas; the fourth book was
devoted to Roman temple architecture. It seems that a Palladian
approach to lunar base architecture would retain the ﬁve classical
orders — Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Composite — in the
language of planetary architecture (Summerson 1963). However,
reduced gravity implies the potential for tall thin buildings with
thin columns and walls. The circular arch (as in Roman aqueducts) is most appropriate for resisting internal pressurization
of lunar bases rather than the parabolic arch developed to resist
gravitational loads on Earth (Benaroya and Bernold 2008). The
catenary arch is the ideal non-parabolic arch with a hyperbolic
cosine curve for a free-standing arch with no vertical load except
its own weight. It is an inversion of a hanging chain in which
only compressive forces are acting, e.g., the domes of Brunelleschi’s Florence Cathedral (Gothic) and Wren’s St Paul’s Cathedral
(Renaissance). The Moon offers a return to classically-derived architectural forms introduced by low-cost customization of 3D
printing — a selenic architectural style.
In his Ten Books on Architecture (c 20 BC), the Roman architect
Vitruvius devoted the ﬁrst 8 books to buildings, ninth book to astronomy and geometry and the tenth book to machines. Vitruvius was a Roman artilleryman/engineer in which capacity, his
job was to destroy fortiﬁcations using siege machines (Shephard
1994). Machines are thus an integral part of the architectural
“whole” (Rasmussen 1964). Habitats, as spacecraft, are machines
for living in, literally rather than ﬁguratively. While buildings
are immovable structures, machines are dynamic mechanisms
and the latter, in the form of technology have been transformative in our social experience (Shephard 1994). It is ﬁtting therefore to concentrate on machines as a neglected but critical aspect
of lunar base architecture. We widen the potential for 3D printing enormously beyond mere structures to encompass on-site
3D printing of complex kinematic machines. The most basic components for a kinematic machine are mechanical levers, cable
pulleys, wheels, electric motors, gear transmission and piston
engines – these are collectively redundant in that piston engines
can be replaced by electric motors, cable pulleys replaced by
motorized cranes, and electric motors are the core component
to powered levers and wheels, without any loss in functionality.
The control of kinematic machines also requires electronics to drive
the motorized mechanisms. From such components — structural
linkages, electric motors, sensors, and electronics — it is possible
to construct tools (powered and unpowered) such as milling

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

stations and lathes, and robots (rover vehicles such as bulldozers/load-haul-dumpers or drills for mining and manipulators for
assembly tasks) and indeed 3D printers. Hence, 3D printing can
be applied to the most challenging of components — mechatronic
components and systems including electric motors, electrical circuitry, sensors, and general-purpose computing — to construct the
machines of production rather than the products themselves.

9. Conclusions
We have considered the requirements for the construction of a
lunar habitat given the constraints of the in situ resources that
are readily recoverable. We suggest that most of the lunar habitat
can be constructed from lunar resources, including civil engineering structures, mechatronic components, robotic machines,
and even basic internal decorum. This goes far beyond traditional
primary structures. We propose therefore that lunar habitat
design should proceed directly to Class III leapfrogging the previous classes as hindrances to self-sustainability of a Moon Village.
Class I and II developmental stages of lunar exploration represent an approach in which terrestrial technology is transported
to the Moon, an alien environment from which servicing, maintenance and repair options will be limited. All engineered constructions will require such support which cannot be supplied
from Earth in a timely or cost-effective manner. This limits the
supportability and permanence of Class I and II lunar bases. Class III
lunar habitats constructed from lunar resources will be the only
option that is fully supported by local lunar resources for maintenance and repair. This necessarily requires the prior implementation of a sophisticated robotic lunar infrastructure to prepare the
way for human presence. We have proposed a scalable means to
accomplish this (Ellery 2016). There are many similarities between
a lunar base and a Martian base (Parkinson and Wright 2006) but
Mars offers a much wider selection of material resources suggesting that much of the technology outlined here is applicable to
Mars bases (Ellery and Muscatello 2020). However, on the Martian
surface, there is reduced solar energy availability 500 W/m2 and
potential reduction in solar availability due to dust storms. This has
potential implications for thermal processing such as sintering of
regolith unless nuclear power sources are adopted. Nevertheless,
3D printing offers enormous scope for architectural design as well
as affording a practical and versatile mode of construction. Just as
the spires of Gothic cathedrals reached out to God, so our lunar
cathedrals much reach higher to point the way to the stars. Our
architecture must reﬂect that our destiny has always been the stars.

References
Adams, R., et al. 1987. Remote repair demonstration of Solar Maximum main
electronics box. Proceedings of the 1st European In-Orbit Operations Technology Symposium (ESA SP-272). pp. 227–233.
Amato, I. 2013. Green cement: Concrete solutions. Nature, 494(7437): 300–301.
doi:10.1038/494300a. PMID:23426307.
Arnold, C. 2019. Medicines on demand. Nature, 575: 274–277. doi:10.1038/d41586019-03455-x.
Arslan, Y. 2014. Biomimetic architecture: a new interdisciplinary approach
to architecture. Alam Cipta, 7(2): 28–35.
Baila, K., Roberson, L., O’Connor, G., Trigwell, S., Bose, S., and Bandyopadhyay, A.
2011. First demonstration on direct laser fabrication of lunar regolith parts.
Rapid Prototyping Journal, 18(6): 451–457. doi:10.1108/13552541211271992.
Balaguer, C., Abderrahim, M., Navarro, J., Boudjabeur, S., Aroma, P., Kahkonen, K.,
et al. 2002. FutureHome: an integrated construction automation approach. IEEE
Robotics & Automation Magazine, 9: 55–66. doi:10.1109/100.993155.
Ball, C., Keaney, M., Chun, R., Groleau, M., Tyssen, M., Keyte, J., et al. 2010.
Anaesthesia and critical care delivery in weightlessness: a challenge for
research in parabolic ﬂight analogue space surgery studies. Planetary and
Space Science, 58: 732–740. doi:10.1016/j.pss.2009.06.011.
Benaroya, H. 2002. Overview of lunar base structures past and future. In
AIAA Space Architecture Symposium, 2002–6113, Houston, Texas. AIAA.
Benaroya, H., and Bernold, L. 2008. Engineering of lunar bases. Acta Astronautica, 62: 277–299. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2007.05.001.
Benaroya, H., Bernold, L., and Chua, K. 2002. Engineering, design and construction of lunar bases. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 15(2): 33–45.
doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0893-1321(2002)15:2(33).
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery

Blamont, J. 2014. Roadmap to cave dwelling on the Moon. Advances in Space
Research, 54: 2140–2149. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2014.08.019.
Bratman, G., Hamilton, P., and Daily, G. 2012. Impacts of nature experience on
human cognitive function and mental health. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 1249: 118–136. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06400.x. PMID:22320203.
Buswell, R., Soar, R., Gibb, A., and Thorpe, A. 2007. Freeform construction: megascale rapid manufacturing for construction. Automation in Construction, 16:
224–231. doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2006.05.002.
Calle, C., McFall, J., Buhler, C., Snyder, S., Ritz, M., Trigwell, S., et al. 2008.
Development of an active dust mitigation technology for lunar exploration.
In AIAA Space Conference & Exposition, San Diego, Calif. AIAA 2008-7894.
doi:10.2514/6.2008-7894.
Ceccanti, F., Dini, E., De Kestelier, X., Colla, V., and Pambaguian, L. 2010. 3D
printing technology for a Moon outpost exploiting lunar soil. In The 61st
International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Paper no. IAC-10-D3.3.5
Cesaretti, G., Dini, E., De Kestelier, X., Colla, V., and Pambaguian, L. 2014.
Building components for an outpost on the lunar soil by means of a novel
3D printing technology. Acta Astronautica, 93: 430–450. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.
2013.07.034.
Chow, P., and Lin, T. 1989. Structural engineer’s concept of lunar structures. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2(1): 1–9. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0893-1321(1989)2:1(1).
Clark, P., Curtis, S., Minetto, F., and Keller, J. 2007. Finding a dust mitigation
strategy that works on the lunar surface. 38th Lunar & Planetary Science
Conference, League City, Texas. No. 1338, 1175.
Cohen, L., Vernon, M., and Bergeron, M. 2008. New molecular technologies
against infectious diseases during spaceﬂight. Acta Astronautica, 63: 769–775.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2007.12.024.
Cohen, M. 2004. Mobile lunar base concepts. AIP Conference Proceedings,
Vol. 699(1). p. 845. doi:10.1063/1.1649649.
Cong, M., and Shi, H. 2008. Study of magnetic ﬂuid rotary seals for wafer
handling robots. In The IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics &
Machine Vision in Practice. pp. 269–273.
Craig, G., Saydam, S., and Dempster, A. 2014. Mining off-Earth minerals: a
long-term play? Journal Southern African Institute of Mining & Metallurgy,
114(12): 1039–1047.
Cross, M., Ellery, A., and Qadi, A. 2013. Estimating terrain parameters for a
rigid wheel rover using neural networks. Journal of Terramechanics, 50(3):
165–174. doi:10.1016/j.jterra.2013.04.002.
Davis, R. 1987. In-orbit and laboratory exchange of ORU’s designed/not designed
for servicing. In Proceedings of the 1st European In-Orbit Operations Technology Symposium (ESA SP-272). pp. 123–126.
Douglas, K. 2021. Nature ﬁx. New Scientist, 249: 36–40. doi:10.1016/S02624079(21)00522-4.
Drudi, L., Ball, C., Kirkpatrick, A., Saary, J., and Grenon, M. 2012. Surgery in
space: where are we now? Acta Astronautica, 79: 61–66. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.
2012.04.014. PMID:23990690.
Durante, M. 2014. Space radiation protection: destination Mars. Life Sciences in
Space Research, 1: 2–9. doi:10.1016/j.lssr.2014.01.002. PMID:26432587.
Eimer, B., and Taylor, L. 2007. Dust mitigation: lunar air ﬁltration with a
permanent magnet system. In The 38th Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, League City, Texas. No. 1338, 1654.
Ellery, A. 2016. Are self-replicating machines feasible? Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, 53(2): 317–327. doi:10.2514/1.A33409.
Ellery, A. 2016. Solar power satellites for clean energy enabled through disruptive technologies. In Proceedings of the 23rd World Energy Congress
(Award Winning Papers), Istanbul, Turkey. pp. 133–147.
Ellery, A. 2017. Low-cost space-based geoengineering – a necessary albeit
unwelcome solution to climate change. In Proceedings of the IAF Global
Space Exploration Conference (GLEX), Beijing, China. GLEX-17-10.1.5x35993
Ellery, A. 2019. In-situ resourced solar power generation and storage for a sustainable Moon Village. Int Astronautics Congress, Washington, D.C. IAC-19,C3.4.4.
x49639.
Ellery, A., and Elaskri, A. 2019. Steps towards self-assembly of lunar structures from modules of 3D printed in-situ resources. In The International
Astronautics Congress, Washington, D.C. IAC-19,D4.1.4.x49787.
Ellery, A., and Muscatello, A. 2020. Provisioning the naked astronaut with bounty
on Mars using robotic self-replicators. Journal of British Interplanetary Society,
73: 409–424.
Ellery, A., Lowing, P., Wanjara, P., Kirby, M., Mellor, I., and Doughty, G. 2017.
FFC Cambridge process and metallic 3D printing for deep in-situ resource
utilisation – a match made on the Moon. In Proceedings of the International Astronautics Congress, Adelaide, Australia. IAC-17-D4.5.4x39364.
ESA. 1995. APM human factors engineering requirements. COL-ESA-FM-013: 13–27.
Faierson, E., Logan, K., Stewart, B., and Hunt, M. 2010. Demonstration of concept
for fabrication of lunar physical assets utilising lunar regolith simulant and a
geothermite reaction. Acta Astronautica, 67: 38–45. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.
12.006.
Frazier, C., Baddour, N., and Ellery, A. 2014. Assistive teleoperation and autonomous operations for planetary rovers using re-active vector equilibrium
(RAVE) navigation. In Proceedings of the 65th International Astronautics
Congress. IAC-14-A5.3-B3.6.6.
Fujishima, A., Rao, T., and Tryk, D. 2000. Titanium dioxide photocatalysis.
Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews,
1: 1–21. doi:10.1016/S1389-5567(00)00002-2.

671

Fujishima, A., Zhang, X., and Tryk, D. 2008. TiO2 photocatalysis and related
surface phenomena. Surface Science Reports, 63: 515–582. doi:10.1016/j.
surfrep.2008.10.001.
Garibotti, J., Cwiertny, A., and Johnson, R. 1980. On orbit fabrication and assembly of large space structural subsystems. Acta Astronautica, 7: 847–865.
doi:10.1016/0094-5765(80)90075-2.
Gracia, V., and Casanova, I. 1998. Sulphur concrete: a viable alternative for
lunar construction. In The 6th ASCE Specialty Conference & Exposition
on Engineering Construction & Operations in Space. pp. 585–591.
Granda, J., Donina, L., Dragone, V., Long, D.-L., and Cronin, L. 2018. Controlling an organic synthesis robot with machine learning to search for new
reactivity. Nature, 559: 377–381. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0307-8. PMID:30022133.
Grigoriev, A., Agadjanyan, A., Baranov, V., and Polyakov, V. 1997. On the
contribution of space medicine in the public health care. Acta Astronautica,
41(4–10): 531–536. doi:10.1016/S0094-5765(98)00053-8. PMID:11541151.
Gronstal, A., Cockell, C.S., Perino, M.A., Bittner, T., Clacey, E., Clark, O.,
et al. 2007. Lunar astrobiology: a review and suggested laboratory equipment.
Astrobiology, 7(5): 767–782. doi:10.1089/ast.2006.0082. PMID:17963476.
Gruber, P. 2008. Signs of life in architecture. Bioinspiration & Biomimetics,
3: 023001. doi:10.1088/1748-3182/3/2/023001. PMID:18369281..
Gruber, P., Hauplik, S., Imhof, B., Ozdemir, K., Waclavicek, R., and Perino, A.
2007. Deployable structures for a human lunar base. Acta Astronautica, 61:
484–495. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2007.01.055.
Grugel, R. 2008. Sulphur “concrete” for lunar applications – environmental
considerations. NASA TM-2008-215250
Haidegger, T., and Benyo, Z. 2008. Surgical robotic support for long duration space
missions. Acta Astronautica, 63: 996–1005. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2008.01.005.
Happel, J. 1993. Indigenous materials for lunar construction. Applied Mechanics
Reviews, 46(6): 313–325. doi:10.1115/1.3120360.
Hay, A., Samson, C., Tuck, L., and Ellery, A. 2018. Magnetic surveying with
an unmanned ground vehicle. Journal of Unmanned Vehicle Systems, 6(4):
249–266. doi:10.1139/juvs-2018-0013.
Horanyi, M., Walch, B., Robertson, S., and Alexander, D. 1998. Electrostatic
charging properties of Apollo 17 lunar dust. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Planets, 103(E4): 8575–8580. doi:10.1029/98JE00486.
Houtchens, B. 1993. Medical care systems for long-duration space missions.
Clinical Chemistry, 39(1): 13–21. doi:10.1093/clinchem/39.1.13. PMID:8419036.
Howe, S., and Wilcox, B. 2016. Outpost assembly using the ATHLETE mobility
system. IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, Montana.
Howe, S., Wilcox, B., McQuin, C., Townsend, J., Rieber, R., Barmatz, M., and
Leichty, J. 2013. Faxing structures to the Moon: freeform additive construction
system (FACS). In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference & Exposition,
San Diego. Calif. Paper no. AIAA 2013-5437. doi:10.2514/6.2013-5437.
Howe, S., Wilcox, B., McQuin, C., Mittman, D., Townsend, J., Polit-Casillas, R.,
and Litwin, T. 2015. Modular additive construction using native materials. In
Proceedings of the 14th Biennial ASCE Aerospace Division International Conference on Engineering, Science, Construction and Operations in Challenging
Environments. pp. 301–312.
Howe, S., Wilcox, B., Barmatz, M., and Voecks, G. 2016. ATHLETE as a mobile ISRU and regolith construction platform. In Proceedings of the ASCE
Conference on Engineering, Science, Construction & Operations in Challenging Environments (Earth & Space Conference), Orlando, Fla.
Ishikawa, N., Kanamori, H., and Okada, T. 1992. Possibility of concrete production on the Moon. In The 2nd Conference on Lunar Bases & Space
Activities of the 21st Century. Edited by W. Mendell. pp. 489–497.
Jablonski, A., and Ogden, K. 2008. Review of technical requirements for
lunar structures. ASCE J Aerospace Engineering, 21(2): 72–90.
Jett, J., Martin, J., Saunders, G., and Stewart, C. 1985. Flow cytometry for health
monitoring in space. In Lunar bases & space activities of the 21st Century.
Edited by W. Mendell. Lunar & Planetary Institute, Houston, Texas. pp. 687–695.
Kading, B., and Straub, J. 2015. Utilising in-situ resources and 3D printing
structures for a manned Mars mission. Acta Astronautica, 107: 317–326.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2014.11.036.
Kaplan, R., and Kaplan, S. 1989. The experience of nature: a psychological
perspective. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Keller, P., and Clemett, S. 2001. Formation of nanophase iron in the lunar regolith. In The 32nd Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, abstract no. 2097.
Khoshnevis, B. 2004. Automated construction by contour crafting – related
robotics and information technologies. Automation in Construction, 13(1):
5–19. doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2003.08.012.
Khoshnevis, B., and Zhang, J. 2012. Extraterrestrial construction using contour crafting. In The Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium, University
of Texas, Austin, Texas. pp. 250–259.
Khoshnevis, B., Bodiford, M., Burks, K., Ethridge, E., Tucker, D., Kim, W.,
et al. 2005. Lunar contour crafting – a novel technique for ISRU-based
habitat development. In Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Paper AIAA 2005-538. doi:10.2514/6.2005-538.
Klyuzhin, I., Symonds, A., Magula, J., and Pollack, G. 2008. New method of
water puriﬁcation based on the particle exclusion phenomenon. Environmental Science & Technology, 42: 6160–6166. doi:10.1021/es703159q. PMID:18767681.
Kolodziejczyk, M., and Orzechowski, L. 2016. Time architecture. Acta Futura,
10: 37–44.
Kozyrovska, N.O., Lutvynenko, T.L., Korniichuk, O.S., Kovalchuk, M.V., Voznyuk, T.M.,
Kononuchenko, O., et al. 2006. Growing pioneer plants for a lunar base. Advances in Space Research, 37: 93–99. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.03.005.
Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

672

Kruzelecky, R., Wong, B., Aissa, B., Haddad, E., Jamroz, W., Cloutis, E., et al.
2010. MoonDust lunar dust simulation and mitigation. AIAA-2010-764033.
doi:10.2514/6.2010-6023.
Kruzelecky, R., Cloutis, E., Hoa, S., Therriault, D., Ellery, A., Xian Jiang, X.
2011. Project MoonDust: characterisation and mitigation of lunar dust. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Environmental Systems.
AIAA 2011-5184.
Landis, G., and Jenkins, P. 2002. Dust mitigation for Mars solar arrays. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Photovoltaic Specialists. pp. 812–815.
Lauer, H., and Allton, J. 1992. Mars containers – dust on Teﬂon sealing surfaces. In Space International Conference Space III: Engineering, Construction & Operations in Space. Vol. 1. pp. 508–517.
Leach, N., Carlson, A., Khoshnevis, B., and Thangavelu, M. 2012. Robotic construction by contour crafting: the case of lunar construction. International Journal
of Architectural Computing, 10(3): 424–438. doi:10.1260/1478-0771.10.3.423.
Lee, S., Lee, J., and Ann, Y. 2015. Manufacture of polymeric concrete on the
Moon. Acta Astronautica, 114: 60–64. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2015.04.004.
Leyh, W. 1995. Experiences with the construction of a building assembly robot.
Automation in Construction, 4: 45–60. doi:10.1016/0926-5805(94)00034-K.
Lim, S., Buswell, R., Le, T., Austin, S., Gibb, A., and Thorpe, T. 2012. Developments in construction-scale additive manufacturing processes. Automation
in Construction, 21: 262–268. doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2011.06.010.
Lin, T. 1987. Concrete for lunar base construction. In Lunar bases & space
activities of the 21st Century. Edited by W. Mendell. pp. 381–396.
Liu, Y., and Taylor, L. 2008. Lunar dust: chemistry and physical properties and
implications for toxicity. In NLSI Lunar Science Conference, 2072 abstract.
Lu, H., Giordano, F., and Ning, Z. 2016. Oxford nanopore minion sequencing
and genome assembly. Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics, 14(5): 265–
279. doi:10.1016/j.gpb.2016.05.004. PMID:27646134.
Martinez, V. 2007. Architecture for space habitats: role of architectural
design in planning artiﬁcial environment for long time manned space missions. Acta Astronautica, 60: 588–593. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2006.09.034.
Matheson, E., and Brooker, G. 2012. Augmented robotic device for EVA hand
maneouvres. Acta Astronautica, 81: 51–61. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.06.006.
McKay, D., Davis, H., and Burns, M. 1996. Using fabricators to reduce space
transportation costs. In Proceedings of the Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium, Austin, Texas. pp. 23–30.
McNab, I. 2003. Launch to space with an electromagnetic railgun. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 39(1): 295–304. doi:10.1109/TMAG.2002.805923.
Mendell, W. 1991. Lunar base as a precursor to Mars exploration and settlement. In
Proceedings of the International Astronautics Congress, Montreal, Que. IAF-91-704.
Montes, C., Broussard, K., Gongre, M., Simicevic, N., Mejia, J., Tham, J., et al.
2015. Evaluation of lunar regolith geopolymer binder as a radioactive shielding material for space exploration applications. Advances in Space Research,
56: 1212–1221. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2015.05.044.
Motro, R. 2012. Tensegrity: from art to structural engineering. In Proceedings
of the IASS-APCS Symposium, Seoul, South Korea.
Mueller, R., Howe, S., Kochmann, D., Ali, H., Anderson, C., Burgoyne, H., et al.
2016. Automated additive construction (AAC) for Earth and space using in-situ
resources. In Proceedings of the 15th Biennial ASCE International Conference
on Engineering Science Construction & Operations in Challenging Environments (Earth & Space 2016), Reston, Va.
Murphy, K., Rygalov, Y., and Johnson, S. 2009. Minimal support technology and insitu resource utilisation for risk management of planetary spaceﬂight missions.
Advances in Space Research, 43: 1275–1284. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2008.12.010.
Oliver, R., Westrick, W., Koehler, J., Brieland-Shoultz, A., Anagnostopoulos, I.,
Cruz-Gonzalez, T., and Hart, J. 2013. Robofurnace: a semi-automated laboratory chemical vapour deposition system for high-throughput nanomaterial
synthesis and process discovery. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 84: 115105.
doi:10.1063/1.4826275.
Ostrach, S. 1982. Low gravity ﬂuid ﬂows. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics,
14: 313–345. doi:10.1146/annurev.ﬂ.14.010182.001525.
Parkinson, B., and Wright, P. 2006. Systems modelling and systems trade
for a pole station. In Project Boreas: A Station for the Martian Geographic
North Pole. Edited by C. Cockell. British Interplanetary Society. pp. 24–31.
Perchonok, M., Cooper, M., and Catauro, P. 2012. Mission to Mars: food production and processing for the ﬁnal frontier. Annual Review of Food Science and Technology, 3: 311–330. doi:10.1146/annurev-food-022811-101222.
PMID:22136130.
Pham, T., and El-Genk, M. 2009. Dose estimates in a lunar shelter with regolith
shielding. Acta Astronautica, 64: 697–713. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2008.12.002.
Pletka, B. 1993. Processing of lunar basalt materials. In Resources of nearEarth space. Edited by J. Lewis, M. Matthews, and M. Guerrieri. University
of Arizona Press. pp. 325–350.
Porter, S., and Bradley, F. 2016. Architectural design principles for extraterrestrial habitats. Acta Futura, 10: 23–35.
Ramsden, J., Sharkan, Y., Zhitov, N., and Korposh, S. 2007. Sensors for spacecraft cabin environment monitoring. Acta Astronautica, 61: 664–667. doi:10.
1016/j.actaastro.2006.12.012.
Rasmussen, S. 1964. Experiencing architecture. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Roedder, E. 1981. Use of lunar materials in space construction. Space Solar
Power Review, 2: 249–258.
Rogers, W., and Sture, S. 1991. Indigenous lunar construction materials. Available
from https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19930019931.pdf.

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

Rousek, T., Eriksson, K., and Doule, O. 2012. SinterHab. Acta Astronautica,
74: 98–111. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.10.009.
Setterﬁeld, T., Ellery, A., and Frazier, C. 2014. Mechanical design and testing
of an instrumented rocker-bogie mobility system for the Kapvik microrover. Journal of British Interplanetary Society, 67: 96–104.
Shephard, P. 1994. What is architecture? An essay on landscapes, buildings,
and machines. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Silberberg, R., Tsao, C., and Adams, J. 1985. Radiation transport of cosmic
ray nuclei in lunar material and radiation doses. In Lunar Bases & Space
Activities of the 21st Century. Edited by W. Mendell. Lunar & Planetary Institute
Publishing. pp. 663–669.
Skibniewski, M., and Wooldridge, S. 1992. Robotic materials handling for
automated building construction technology. Automation in Construction,
1: 251–266. doi:10.1016/0926-5805(92)90017-E.
Soleymani, T., Trianni, V., Bonani, M., Mondada, F., and Dorigo, M. 2015.
Bio-inspired construction with mobile robots and compliant pockets. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, 74: 340–350. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2015.07.018.
Sproewitz, A., Billard, A., Dillenbourg, P., and Ijspeert, J. 2009. Roombots –
mechanical design of self-reconﬁguring modular robots for adaptive furniture. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics &
Automation. pp. 4259–4264.
Staehle, R., Burke, J., Dowling, R., and Spudis, P. 1993. Lunar base siting. Spaceﬂight, 35(12): 427–446.
Sullivan, T., Koenig, E., Knudsen, C., and Gibson, M. 1994. Pneumatic conveying of materials at partial gravity. Journal of Aerospace Engineering,
7(2): 199–208. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0893-1321(1994)7:2(199).
Summerson, J. 1963. Classical language of architecture. Thames & Hudson Ltd.,
London.
Tarr, J. 2002. Metabolism of the industrial city. Journal of Urban History, 28(5):
511–545. doi:10.1177/0096144202028005001.
Ten Haken, I., Allouch, B., and van Harten, W. 2018. Use of advanced medical
technologies at home: a systematic review of the literature. BMC Public
Health, 18(1): 284. doi:10.1186/s12889-018-5123-4. PMID:29482550.
Thiebaut, L., and Cowley, A. 2019. Microwave processing of regolith – a 1D
printing cavity for enabling lunar construction technology. In Proceedings of
the 8th European Conf Aeronautics & Space Sciences, Paper 917.
Trembley, P. 1994. EVA safety design guidelines. Acta Astronautica, 32(1): 59–68.
van Houdt, R., Mijnendonckx, K., and Leys, N. 2012. Microbial contamination
monitoring and control during human space missions. Planetary and Space
Science, 60: 115–120. doi:10.1016/j.pss.2011.09.001.
Vaniman, D., Petit, D., and Heiken, G. 1992. Uses of lunar sulphur. In The 2nd Conference on Lunar Bases & Space Activities of the 21st Century. Vol. 2. pp. 429–435.
Waldron, R. 1988. Lunar manufacturing: a survey of products and processes.
Acta Astronautica, 17(7): 691–708. doi:10.1016/0094-5765(88)90184-1.
Wallace, W., Phillips, C., Jeevarajan, A., Chen, B., and Taylor, L. 2010. Nanophase iron-enhanced chemical reactivity of ground lunar soil. Earth and
Planetary Science Letters, 295: 571–577. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2010.04.042.
Weaver, L., and Laursen, E. 1992. Techniques for the utilisation of extraterrestrial
resources. Acta Astronautica, 26(1): 61–76. doi:10.1016/0094-5765(92)90143-7.
Weston, A., and Hood, L. 2004. Systems biology, proteomics and the future
of healthcare: toward predictive, preventative and personalized medicine.
Journal of Proteome Research, 3: 179–196. doi:10.1021/pr0499693.
Wilhelm, S., and Curbach, M. 2014. Review of possible mineral materials
and production techniques for a building material on the Moon. Structural
Concrete, 15(3): 419–428. doi:10.1002/suco.201300088.
Williams, R., II, Albus, J., and Bostelman, R. 2004. Self-contained automated
construction deposition system. Automation in Construction, 13: 393–407.
doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2004.01.001.
Yu, C.-H., Haller, K., Ingber, D., and Nagpal, R. 2008. Morpho: a self-deformable
modular robot inspired by cellular structure. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots & Systems. pp. 3571–3578.
Yu, D., Zhu, L.-M., Branford-White, C., and Yang, X. 2008. 3D printing in
pharmaceutics: promises and problems. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
97(9): 3666–3690. doi:10.1002/jps.21284.

Appendix A
Lunar industrial ecology
The following lists all the major chemical processing reactions
comprising the near closed loop lunar industrial ecology — feedback
loops are not explicitly shown but may be deduced by linking
reaction products to reactants for different chemical processes.
Emboldened materials are pure metal oxides that are input to
the Metalysis FFC process for direct reduction to high purity metal
or semiconductor. It is important to note that all the volatiles (with
the exception of carbon compounds) extracted from regolith are
recycled as reagents and not consumed. In the case of carbon
compounds, we have proposed the manufacture of silicone plastics
as electrically insulated elastomers – however, we can minimize this
by exploiting glass cloth and porcelain of knob-and-tube technology.

Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

Ellery
673

Published by Canadian Science Publishing

Can. J. Civ. Eng. Downloaded from cdnsciencepub.com by 205.178.28.99 on 12/15/25
For personal use only.

674
Can. J. Civ. Eng. Vol. 49, 2022

Published by Canadian Science Publishing

