Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.

Metalysis Fray Farthing Chen Process As a Strategic
Lunar In Situ Resource Utilization Technology
Alex Ellery,1 Ian Mellor,2 Priti Wanjara,3* and Melchiorri Conti4
1

Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department,
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada.
2
Metalysis Ltd, Rotherham, United Kingdom.
3
National Research Council, Aerospace Structures Materials &
Manufacturing, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.
4
European Space Research & Technology Centre (ESA-ESTEC),
Noordwijk, The Netherlands.

Metalysis FFC and metal 3D printing—offer unprecedented capabilities for a lunar infrastructure manufacturing chain. In particular, we take note of their high-energy efficiency that will be
crucial to lunar in situ resource utilization.
Keywords: sustainable in situ resource utilization, Metalysis
FFC process, additive manufacturing, lunar industrial ecology, lunar industrialization

ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

Crucial to permanent occupation of the Moon will be the exploitation of local resources to build a lunar infrastructure. We
examine 2 processes—the Metalysis Fray Farthing Chen (FFC)
process and metal three-dimensional (3D) printing—as the
backbone of a robust and sustainable industrial ecology on the
Moon to exploit its raw material resources with husbandry. The
Metalysis FFC process is an electrochemical technique that can
extract near pure metals from their oxide and silicate forms
through cathodic reduction. An anode (graphite) and cathode
(metal oxide to be reduced) reside in a bath of molten salt CaCl2
at 900–1,100C. A voltage is applied and the metal oxide releases oxygen ions into the molten salt, and oxygen is released at
the cathode and transferred to the anode as CO or CO2 gas if the
anode is graphite. At the cathode, the metal oxide is reduced into
metal plus oxygen through a series of intermediate steps. We
outline how the Metalysis FFC process can be leveraged through
a handful of chemical preprocessing methods to exploit its
versatility. We have demonstrated some preliminary experiments
in extracting Ti metal powder from rutile through the Metalysis
FFC process, which was subsequently 3D printed into Ti test
structures using selective laser sintering. These 2 methods—

U

ntil we transport infrastructure onto the Moon and
other extraterrestrial locations that enables the
production of useful assets to court all the above, the
prospect of human space exploration in any robust
sense remains bleak. To construct productive capacity on
extraterrestrial locations such as the Moon, we must exploit
local resources to drive down the cost of space exploration.
Although in situ resource utilization (ISRU) is yet to be deployed in support of space missions, it has been actively
proposed to reduce the costs of human missions and the
principle has recently been demonstrated on Mars.
The European Moon Village is an ambitious concept to build
a complete infrastructure of several human-occupied bases on
the lunar surface devoted to a range of activities across a diverse set of participants from governments to private interests.
This will necessarily require extensive ISRU capabilities to
reduce their reliance on Earth-supplied resources.
We review in-situ resource utilisation on the Moon as background context to the FFC process (S1). Together, the Metalysis
Fray Farthing Chen (FFC) process and metal additive manufacturing offer a sustainable approach to ISRU on the Moon.

*Correction added on March 10, 2022 after first online publication of January 18, 2022: The surname of co-author Priti Wanjara was misspelled as Wanjari. The byline
has been corrected.

224 NEW SPACE ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10 NO. 2  2022

DOI: 10.1089/space.2021.0047

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS
The Metalysis FFC process has widespread applications as a
universal chemical processing technique on the Moon. It was
originally developed to replace the Kroll process in extracting Ti
metal from rutile (TiO2). In the Kroll process, a series of processes
are involved.1 First, carbochlorination of solid rutile TiO2 with
Cl2 in a fluidized bed reactor yields TiCl4 liquid at 950C:
TiO2 + 2Cl2 + C ! TiCl4 + 2CO

Ilmenite can be treated similarly directly:
2FeTiO3 + 7Cl2 + 6C ! 2TiCl4 + 2FeCl3 + 6CO

The liquid is evaporated and fractionally distilled for purification. The carbon can be reduced and recycled. Carbochlorination of rutile normally proceeds at 950C, but lower temperatures
at 350–450C are possible thereby reducing corrosion.2 Second,
reduction of TiCl4 with a more reactive metal such as Mg or Na
yields Ti metal sponge and NaCl (or MgCl2) at 500C:
TiCl4 + 4Na ! Ti + 4NaCl
TiCl4 + 2Mg ! Ti + 2MgCl2

Electrolysis of MgCl2 or NaCl recycles Mg and Na. By contrast,
the Metalysis FFC process extracts Ti metal from rutile more efficiently than the Kroll process producing 1 kg Ti from 1.66 kg
rutile.3 It is an electrochemical technique that reduces powdered
oxide at the cathode into high-purity metals (>99% pure). The raw
mineral oxide requires physical preprocessing through powdering, compacting, and sintering into a cathode rod. It is inserted
into an electrolytic cell with the molten alkaline earth salt CaCl2 as
the electrolyte at around 900C in conjunction with an appropriate anode.4 CaCl2 electrolyte melts at 762C and dissolves its
own oxide (CaO) at 900C even at low voltages over 2.5 V, but 3 V
is adopted nominally for the electrolytic voltage.5
The metal oxide is in sintered powder form acting as the
cathode despite being nonconducting and is directly reduced to
metal in the solid state. Due to the brittleness of metal oxides,
they can be ground to a finer powder than the metal form
thereby offering finer grained metal powder after processing.
Multiple oxides may be treated simultaneously at different
cathodes to create different metals in the same cell. The required
heating to 850–1,100C is modest, but electrolytic energy is
required to split all the mineral components. The cathode is
reduced to sintered solid pure metal sponge releasing O2- ions
into the electrolyte solution, which are transported to the
graphite anode to form CO/CO2 gas, which is released:
Cathode : MOx ðsÞ + 2xe - ! M + xO2 Anode : C + O2 - ! CO + 2e - and C + 2O2 - ! CO2 + 4e -

Nominally, a graphite anode is used and consumed through
oxidation yielding anode-evolved CO/CO2 gas. Any metal
oxide can be reduced in this manner—essentially, this is an
electrolytic version of carbothermal reduction of mineral
oxides. Reduction of the metal oxide occurs in the solid state
without melting, yielding lower energy consumption. The
CaCl2 electrolyte is not consumed (except through retention of
electrolyte by porous cathodes) and is recycled, requiring only
Cl imported from the Earth to replenish the small losses in
porous cathodes. In a lunar context, the addition of CaO derived from anorthite to the electrolyte enhances electrolytic
conductivity to a current of 4 A while the electrolytic cell may
be contained in an alumina crucible.
The graphite anode is consumed and must be replaced. To
obviate against the loss of graphite anodes, an inert anode
would be desirable to release O2 gas directly (2O2- / O2 + 4e-).
SnO2 doped with 2% Sb2O3 and 1% CuO was successful as an
inert anode, but it eroded rapidly due to the formation of
CaSnO3; a more promising anode was a solid solution of calcium titanate and calcium ruthenate (CaTixRu1-xO3), which
offered negligible degradation.6 An inert anode may be constructed from ferrites or cermet (nickel/ferrite mixture), which
could be sourced on the Moon, but this is yet to be explored.
Other potential anode materials include NiO, CaTiO3, or
Ca2Fe2O5 (subject to existing patents filed in 2006), which are
also derivable from lunar resources. Graphite anodes are well
established, but capturing and recycling the CO/CO2 gas and
reducing it to carbon will be necessary to conserve the carbon.
CO/CO2 may be recycled through the Sabatier reaction—this is
an example of a potential lunar field test of ISRU techniques
required for human Mars missions. First, the CO component
may be fully burned, but this may be performed at low temperature in the presence of a spinel catalyst at 30–350C7:
CO + 0:5 O2 ! CO2

The Sabatier reaction with hydrogen occurs at 300C reconstituting methane:
CO2 + 4H2 ! CH4 + 2H2 O

If required, the water can be electrolyzed to recover oxygen
and the hydrogen recycled. Methane may be pyrolytically split
into carbon and hydrogen at 1,400C using an Ni catalyst:
CH4 ! C + 2H2

This would regenerate the carbon required for the graphite
anode. Other options include reduction of CO through the
Boudouard reaction at 700C:

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10 NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 225

ELLERY ET AL.

2CO ! C + CO2

Further reduction is achieved through the Bosch reaction at
530–730C with an Fe catalyst:
CO2 + 2H2 ! C + 2H2 O

Heating of the electrolyte to the modest 900C could be
accomplished through solar concentrators such as Fresnel
lenses. We have demonstrated Fresnel lens smelting of Zn-Al
alloy (Zn additive prevents oxidation, which is unnecessary
under the vacuum conditions on the Moon) at 800C using a
1.2 m · 0.9 m lens with a focal length of 1 m under field conditions (Fig. 1).
The maximum temperature T achievable by a solar concentrator is given by8:
T=



CS0 1=4
r

2

where C = AAar = sinn 2 h = concentration ratio (ratio of radiating-toabsorber area) = 2,000 being readily achievable,9 s = Stefan/
Boltzmann constant, S0 = solar radiation density = 1,358 W/m2
for the Moon, y = incident radiation acceptance half angle,
and n = refractive index of transparent covering on absorber.
Sintering requires heat fluxes of 50 W/cm2 to generate rego-

lith temperatures of 1,000C. A set of solar parabolic mirror
concentrators of 1.5 m2 area may be focused to melt lunar
regolith at *1,600C. For Ca = 1,000 (such as a scaled-up 3 m
lens focused on a 5-cm-diameter furnace spot), Tmax > 2,000 K,
which is more than sufficient to melt or vaporize common
metals and silica/quartz.
A larger solar furnace can generate temperatures of 2,200–
2,700C to potentially vaporize lunar regolith, but this is
unnecessary in this context. However, increased pressure
within reaction vessels can also reduce crucible temperatures
required for Fresnel lens as thermal transmission may be
conveyed through quartz rods into the reactor vessel.
The distribution of thermal energy through the electrolytic bath may prove challenging. A stirring mechanism
must be implemented to distribute heat flux through
the electrolyte—the low gravity permits exploitation of
buoyancy-driven thermal convection. Alternatively, the use
of high-temperature silica optical fibers can transfer concentrated solar radiation and distribute thermal energy
through the bath. An array of solar parabolic concentrators
has demonstrated the transfer of solar energy through a
secondary optical funnel to an optical waveguide constructed from optical fibers to provide more uniform heating.10 It delivered up to 1,000 W/m2 to regolith to generate
1,800C sufficient for carbothermal reduction with an
overall efficiency of >40%.
Electrical energy may be supplied through thermionic
conversion with losses in conversion efficiency, but the
electrical energy requirement of around 3% is dwarfed by the
thermal energy requirement of the furnace of *97% (Table 1).
It cannot be emphasized enough how important this factor is
in relation to lunar ISRU because significant amounts of energy loss are encountered in the conversion of light/thermal
energy into electrical energy. Since 97% of the energy input to
the Metalysis FFC process is thermal, with only 3% electrical,
this ensures maximum energy efficiency with minimal energy
losses.
Table 1. Power Requirements for the Metalysis Fray
Farthing Chen Cambridge Process for Generation 1 Cell
and the Scaled-Up Generation 2 Cell
Generation 1

Generation 2

Furnace

5 kW

Furnace

60 kW

Salt volume

0.001 m3

Salt volume

0.25 m3

Electrolysis power

175 W

Electrolysis power

1,750 W

Postprocessing power

0.1 kW

Postprocessing power

100 kW

Fig. 1. Metalysis FFC process cell. FFC, Fray Farthing Chen.

226 NEW SPACE 2022

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

The solar concentrators may be used in conjunction with
vacuum tube-based thermionic conversion to generate electrical energy.11 Efficiencies of 20% are typical of the Russian
nuclear reactor thermionic conversion with TC = 1,650C at
the cathode and TA = 650C at the anode.12 Thermionic conversion requires vacuum tube materials—glass, tungsten,
nickel, and kovar, which can be sourced on the Moon.
There are a number of potential improvements to thermionic conversion efficiency. The use of electric potential
shaping can increase efficiencies up to 40%.13 A second
thermoelectric conversion stage (e.g., Mg2Si) may yield up to
30% efficiencies.14 Photon-enhanced thermionic conversion15,16 adds a photovoltaic stage for up to 50% efficiencies
that may be implemented with aluminum-doped hematite
photocathodic coatings17 (formed from ilmenite-derived iron
heated in oxygen) or other photoconductive coatings. In situ
thermionic conversion approaches offer greater efficiencies
than in situ resourced solar cells.18,19
However, it may conservatively be estimated that
thermionic-electrical conversion efficiencies are unlikely to
exceed 30% in a lunar context from in situ manufactured
thermionic converters. Hence, the Metalysis FFC process can
be implemented through solar thermal energy with only a
small supplement of electrical energy to minimize energy
conversion losses compared with full electrical energy supply
(as adopted on the Earth).

DIRECT APPLICATION OF METALYSIS FFC
PROCESSING TO LUNAR RESOURCES
In its most obvious application, the Metalysis FFC process
can be applied directly to lunar minerals without preprocessing to yield mongrel alloys. Whereas commonly used
alloys typically comprise a single dominant metal with the
addition of small amounts of other metals, mongrel alloys
are dependent on the initial constituents of the mineral,
which almost certainly do not correlate with desirable alloys.
Most experiments performed with the lunar regolith simulant will not replicate lunar regolith actual in this context—
they are constructed from terrestrial constituents that
approximate most of the physical, but only some of the
chemical, properties of lunar regolith. Many of the subtle and
minor constituents will not be represented accurately.
Most of these experiments are concerned with the extraction of oxygen rather than the metal residue, and so, the fidelity of simulants is of reduced concern. In our context,
however, this aspect will be crucial and is currently unexplored. The Metalysis FFC process at 900C has been applied to
a sintered pressed solid lunar regolith simulant ( JSC-1 representing mare regolith) in a molten CaCl2 electrolyte with an

applied potential of 3V.20 A powder bed of loose regolith simulant (30 g) rather than a powder bed of pressed and sintered
powder has yielded a 96% (4.5 g) oxygen recovery rate after
50 h of operation.21
The metallic products of metal alloy were enriched in Al/Fe,
Fe/Si/Al, and Ca/Al/Si/Mg, suggesting a degree of metal
specificity. However, it is unclear how discriminatory this
specificity is, and indeed, how representative this is to the
lunar regolith constituents. In the case of lunar minerals, we
expect the resultant mongrel alloys following reduction (ignoring minor constituents) to involve:
1. extraction of FeTi amalgam and O2 from lunar ilmenite
(FeTiO3);
2. extraction of Al-Si-Ca alloy and O2 from lunar anorthite
(CaAl2Si2O8); and
3. extraction of MgSi alloy and O2 from lunar olivine
(Mg2SiO4).
We have not examined pyroxene reduction as pyroxene has
highly variable constitutions of the form (Ca,Mg,Fe)2Si2O6,
but see Table 2 for the use of pyroxene with HCl treatment.
The Metalysis FFC process can reduce ilmenite (FeTiO3)
yielding TiFe and TiFe2 alloy sponge, which may be crushed
into a metal powder—experiments with a sintered ilmenite
powder cathode yielded 90% oxygen recovery (32 kg) from
rutile mineral (100 kg).22 The general FeTi alloy may be used for
general purpose structures; ferrotitanium alloy (45%–75% Ti)
may be used as an oxygen getter or as a pyrotechnic powder
fuel with an O2 oxidant. Its oxygen-scavenging properties do
not prevent its general use on the Moon, but it should not be
used where free O2 is in proximity (such as habitat interiors).
The Metalysis FFC process may reduce lunar olivine
(Mg2SiO4) directly into MgSi alloy. MgSi alloys may be used
for general purpose structures—small amounts of Mg2Si alloy
are added to Al to produce high-strength Al alloy and can
tolerate small proportions of Fe contamination characteristic
of lunar olivines of Fe:Mg ratios of *1:4 to 2.3.23 The 6061
series is the commonest aluminum alloy and has minor additives of 0.8%–1.2% Mg, 0.4%–0.8% Si, 0%–0.7% Fe, and
0%–0.25% Ti (Cr and Mn may be omitted as they impart oxidative corrosion resistance). Mg2Si is also a thermoelectric
material but with poor efficiency.
The Metalysis FFC process may also reduce the MgAl2O4
spinel to MgAl alloy (such as magnalium used as a lightweight
corrosion-resistant alloy or solid fuel if ground into powder),
but this would require that it be separated out from the other
products of Mg, AlSi alloy, and pure Si.
The Metalysis FFC process can reduce lunar anorthite
(CaAl2Si2O8) from highland regions to AlCaSi alloy—a

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10

NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 227

Table 2. Near Closed-Loop Lunar Industrial Ecology (Emboldened Materials Are Pure Metal Oxides for Direct Reduction
Using the Metalysis Fray Farthing Chen Process)

Earth-imported NaCl is used as a source of recycled reagents, and so, is not consumed. Lunar volatiles that are similar are used as recycled reagents and are not
consumed. The exception is carbon volatiles that may be used to manufacture silicone plastic elastomers, but if electrical insulation is implemented with glass cloth, the
requirement for silicones will be minimal.

228 NEW SPACE 2022

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

sintered cathode of anorthite may be reduced to yield Al, Ca,
and Si alloy. AlCaSi alloy may be used for general purpose
structures. If Ca can be removed, aluminum/silicon is a
common filler metal used for brazing aluminum. Brazing involves melting a lower melting point filler to join 2 metal parts
in a gas flux to prevent oxidation (unnecessary in a vacuum).
Nickel alloy is used for joining steels, while cobalt is used
for joining superalloys, but brazing does not have the high
strength of a welded joint. AlSi alloys (20%–50% Si) are used
for welds, through which the Si provides fluidity with low
shrinkage. As they solidify, the Si particles provide high wear
resistance and low thermal expansion. To compensate for Fe
contamination, Ni and Co may be added to improve strength
(which may be sourced from in situ NiFe meteorite material).
AlSi alloy exhibits lower viscosity than pure aluminum and
is suitable for casting or powder metallurgy. Etching yields a
hardened, highly wear-resistant silicon precipitate that is
porous enough to retain oil that is suitable for linerless reciprocating components. Silumin (3%–25% Si) alloy is an AlSi
alloy used for high durability applications such as in the lining
of moving parts for machines such as pistons. However, it is
likely that these specialist metal alloys will require extensive
preprocessing to yield the required proportions for the desired
properties.
The properties of these mongrel alloys (and indeed, those
resulting from pyroxene reduction)—FeTi, AlCaSi, and MgSi—
need to be investigated further. There are certainly some
potential uses, including structural uses. The specialized applications of the mongrel alloys are insufficiently useful to
justify the use of the Metalysis FFC process directly to unprocessed lunar minerals—most of the utility of the alloys
requires extensive preprocessing to remove specific components from the melt, for example, silumin requires the removal
of Ca. It is an open question whether structural uses of mongrel alloys are competitive with alternatives.
Compressive structures may be constructed on the Moon
using raw regolith—JSC-1AC lunar regolith simulant, comprising dominantly plagioclase with some olivine and pyroxene, has been processed using a 2 J/mm2 laser energy to
melt the regolith and form dense amorphous structures
through thermal three-dimensional (3D) printing.24 As we
shall see, single-species metals can be extracted if chemically
preprocessed, affording highly tailorable functional properties in alloy design.

CHEMICAL PREPROCESSING OF LUNAR
RESOURCES FOR THE METALYSIS FFC PROCESS
The versatility of the Metalysis FFC process is best realized
in the reduction of pure metal oxides into pure metals with

well-defined functional properties, which can also be mixed
into precisely constituted alloys with tailored functional
properties. Hence, we must use thermochemical preprocessing to reduce mixed metal lunar minerals into pure elemental metals, from which desired alloys can be
constructed. On Earth, most ores are oxides (e.g., bauxite,
hematite, and rutile) although some are sulfides (e.g., pyrite
and chalcopyrite). Typically, metal sulfides are preprocessed
by roasting in air into metal oxides and sulfur dioxide and
then processed as metal oxides, that is, preprocessing is well
established.
Although ores do not exist on the Moon, lunar minerals—
primarily silicates—must similarly be thermally processed into
pure metal oxides. A simple example of this shown earlier is
ilmenite being reduced pyrochemically to recover Fe and O2
and the resultant rutile (TiO2), which may be reduced in
molten CaCl2 electrolyte through the Metalysis FFC process to
Ti metal while extracting over 99% of the oxide component.
Ulvospinel can also be reduced in a similar manner to yield
rutile, iron, and oxygen, with the rutile reduced to Ti metal
using the Metalysis FFC process. Rutile (TiO2) in powdered
form (Fig. 2a) was the feedstock to the Metalysis FFC process
and was reduced directly to Ti metal powder (Fig. 2b). Some
residual impurities, including iron, may be useful in producing titanium alloys.
We may use other preprocessing approaches to other lunar
minerals to render single-metal oxides. Most simply, we can
use some pure metals and mongrel alloys for reduction.
Magnesian olivine (forsterite) may be subjected to aluminothermic reduction in the appropriate proportions at
1,000C:
3Mg2 SiO4 + 6Al ! 2MgAl2 O4 + 4MgO + 2AlSi + Si

MgO can be reduced using the Metalysis FFC process or,
alternatively, MgO can be reduced by AlSi by continuing the
reaction at 1,000C to yield Mg metal:
4MgO + 2AlSi ! MgAl2 O4 + 3Mg + 2Si

Molten Mg above 650C enables it to be tapped from the
refractory oxide and Si metal sponge. Magnesium is used in the
production of magnesium alloy—since it is primarily alloyed
with aluminum, reduction of MgAl2O4 using the Metalysis FFC
process produces an alloy excessively rich in Al (most magnesium alloys include 3%–13% aluminum and traces of Mn).
The case for magnesium alloy over aluminum per se is marginal
for general purpose structural applications.
However, Magnox is a highly specialized magnesium alloy
(Mg plus 0.8% Al and 0.004% Be) used for cladding fissile
material up to 415C, but the omission of Be eliminates its

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10

NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 229

ELLERY ET AL.

offers high-coercivity (permanent)
magnetism intermediate between ironbased and rare Earth-based magnets for
electric motors with a high-temperature
tolerance up to 530C (higher than rare
earth magnets). Different combinations
offer different properties (such as brittleness and corrosion resistance), and
so, it is unclear what effect the omission
of Cu will have. Aluminum powder
mixed with iron oxide powder when
ignited undergoes a rapid thermite reaction that is used for welding metal
(historically, for welding railway
tracks). Hence, aluminum has a wide
versatility of functions. There are several options for processing anorthite as
a source of aluminum.
We propose an artificial weathering
approach (using hot concentrated HCl
rather than dilute carbonic acid H2CO3)
yielding silica, clays, and other nontoxic products (see our lunar industrial
ecology of Table 2). If HCl is imported
from Earth (in NaCl form for in situ
Fig. 2. Smelting of Al alloy pieces using a Fresnel lens-based solar concentrator.
conversion into HCl), acid leaching by
HCl is a viable approach to reducing
most desirable properties of low-neutron capture cross secanorthite via kaolinite while avoiding high temperatures retion. Magnetite (ferrite) may be manufactured from ferric olquiring only modest heating to accelerate the reaction25:
ivine (fayalite) from chondritic sources on the Moon through
CaAl2 Si2 O8 + 8HCl + 2H2 O ! CaCl2 + 2AlCl3 :6H2 O + 2SiO2
oxidation at 400–700C:
The advantage of the artificial weathering approach is that
6Fe2 SiO4 + 2O2 ! 3Fe3 ðSiO4 Þ2 + Fe3 O4
it also produces CaCl2 electrolyte as a by-product to replenish
potential losses of the Metalysis FFC electrolyte—it represents
The product magnetite may be used to form ferrites, ina lunar analogue to the terrestrial recycling of CaCl2 as a
cluding cobalt ferrite used as a hard magnetic material in
waste product of the Solvay process. Aluminum chloride
electric motors.
hexahydrate (AlCl3.6H2O) may be melted above 100C to
If anorthite is processed beforehand, Al and Si metals may
separate it from CaCl2 and SiO2—it may subsequently be hebe extracted as elemental metals. Ca and Si are desirable alated to yield alumina at 400C:
though the former might not be as valuable as Al (although Ca
is a better conductor than Cu or Al, but its specific conduc2AlCl3 :6H2 O ! Al2 O3 + 6HCl + 3H2 O
tivity is inferior to Al). Aluminum is versatile as a structural
material as it is lighter and easier to machine than steel and as
Alumina may be subjected to the Metalysis FFC process to
electrical/thermal conducting wire, and it is used instead of
yield Al metal as a lunar analogue to the Hall/Heroult process.
copper for overhead electricity cabling with two-thirds of its
One of the products of artificial weathering is silica, which
electrical conductivity. Aluminum is typically used for highis rare on the Moon, which may be precipitated out from silicic
reflectivity mirrors and its light weight favors its use in solar
acid solution. Silica may be used as a ceramic (such as in fiber
sails as thin films.
or wool form), for fused silica glass manufacture for highAlnico (8%–12% Al, 15%–26% Ni, 5%–24% Co alloy with
grade optical components, and/or reduced to silicon metal
minor amounts up to 6% Cu and up to 1% Ti, the rest being Fe)
(primarily as an alloy additive). Lunar aluminosilicate such as

230 NEW SPACE 2022

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

anorthite may be adopted as the basis for glass on the Moon—
aluminosilicate (57% SiO2, 20% Al2O3, 12% MgO, 5% CaO)
glasses have a melt temperature of *1,100–1,350C, which is
significantly lower than the 1,700C required of fused silica.26
However, the moderate to high FeO content causes glass
darkening, which is undesirable for transparency, and so, it
would have to be removed, but this will be difficult.
Aluminosilicate glass may be used in fiber form for glass
fabric or wool for electrical and/or thermal insulation or for
structural reinforcement in aluminum metal, for example,
ceramic composites such as Al2O3 particles/fibers have been
embedded in an Al metal matrix to yield high-strength materials.27 However, for transparent optical components, fused
silica glass eliminates the problem of iron darkening in natural
glasses. High-purity silica may be accomplished by heating
SiO2 in an H2-O2 flame in the presence of SiCl4 vapor:
SiCl4 + 2H2 + O2 ! SiO2 + 4HCl

SiO2 may be reduced to silicon metal by the Metalysis FFC
process at 850C, with multiple metal wire electrode contact
points in the bulk material supplying electrons.28 It yields metallurgical purity requiring it to be further purified for use in solar
photovoltaics/electronics. Powdered Si metal may be reacted
with HCl at 300C yielding the volatile trichlorosilane liquid:
Si + 3HCl ! HCl3 Si + H2

Removal of H2 allows reversal to yield purified polysilicon:
HCl3 Si ! Si + HCl + Cl2

Purification of Si permits recycling of chlorine. The degree of
purification achievable under lunar conditions is unclear and
the purity requirements for electronics are extremely stringent.
Apart from enstatite (MgSiO3), one of the few uses of pyroxenes
due to their nature as complex solid solutions of metal silicates
is as a source of silica on treatment with HCl acid.
HCl can be manufactured in situ from NaCl salt rather than
importing it as an acid. A similar notion proposed leveraging
of aluminum, silicon, glass, and oxygen from lunar resources
by the import of KF from Earth, which may be salt electrolyzed
into K and F,26 but fluorine-based reactions are aggressive. A
similar artificial weathering method may be applied to lunar
orthoclase to release K salts as reagents (in the lunar industrial
ecology of Table 2). A second process that may be applied to
anorthite is carbothermal reduction to alumina feedstock directly at 1,650C:
CaAl2 Si2 O8 + 4C ! CaO + Al2 O3 + 2Si + 4CO

The mixture of metal oxides and silicon requires separation
after powdering. The addition of Al metal powder at high

temperature scavenges oxygen (by forming Al2O3) and reduces CaO to Ca metal under vacuum conditions, which may
be tapped off as liquid above 842C. However, contamination
is certain, and liquid aluminum absorbs calcium to form AlCa
alloy making the extraction of pure Ca inviable.29 Nevertheless, CaO without reduction has utility as a low work
function coating for thermionic cathodes. The advantage of
ready CaO recovery with direct Al2O3 and Si manufacture
through carbothermic reduction of anorthite must be traded
against its high temperature. We have included both methods
in our lunar industrial ecology (Table 2).
Unlike most electrolytic techniques that are highly material specific and bespoke, the Metalysis FFC process can be
applied to many metal oxides to yield high-purity metals
for future generations of ISRU evolutions offering an unrivaled one-process-fits-all technique. It exhibits lowenergy consumption due to the low temperatures required
because the oxides or metals do not require melting. Metal
oxides may be presented in a mixed prealloy form to
combine metals that cannot otherwise be combined due to
disparate melting points. The solid-state operation permits
the creation of alloys that combine low melting point and
high melting point metals where the melting temperature of
one (such as W) is greater than the boiling temperature of
the other (such as Al).30
Mixed oxides can thus be processed regardless of melting
points to form unique alloys, including metal alloys from
mixed oxide powders such as titanium aluminide TiAl,
which has excellent high-temperature properties from TiO2
and Al2O3 reactants.31 The manufacture of the shape
memory alloy NiTi alloy from Ni and Ti oxides introduces
the possibility for artificial muscle actuators from lunar
resources.32 The shape memory effect involves a transformation between a low-temperature martensite crystalline
phase and a high-temperature austenite crystalline phase.
If deformed in the martensite phase followed by heating
above a critical temperature, the reverse transformation can
be induced. Superelasticity is another property of the shape
memory effect.
If drawn to thin diameters <200 mm thick, NiTi can yield
100% strains. In their superelastic phase, NiTi exhibits a
similar stress/strain characteristic of a human tendon. NiTi
wires are made through casting using vacuum arc or induction
melting and drawing into wire. Training occurs with shaping
at 400–500C for 30 min, then quenched. Shape memory
materials may be embedded in structures where their electrical
resistance generates self-heating for vibration-suppression.
They may also be adopted as sheets for controlling solar
sails.33 Future possibilities for the Metalysis FFC process with

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10 NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 231

ELLERY ET AL.

more extensive material recovery from potassium-rare earth
elements-phosphorus minerals include permanent magnetic
NdFeB and superconducting NbTi alloys.
It is apparent that in conjunction with preprocessing
schemes, the Metalysis FFC process promises a wide variety of
metals from lunar minerals. Indeed, it forms the linchpin of
our lunar industrial ecology that incorporates preprocessing
within a framework of recycling to ensure that all reagents are
recycled and reconstituted (Table 2). We have discussed only a
subset of the lunar industrial ecology, but present the entire
architecture for completeness.

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING OF METALS
A common approach to the execution of multiple
manufacturing tasks is to develop specialized optimized machinery to achieve each individual task. These manufacturing
methods are typically subtractive, for example, casting, milling,
turning, and forging, which require specialized tooling and invoke a significant waste of material (swarf and tailings). This is
not an option for planetary ISRU where resources must be husbanded and tasks may be unanticipated and require adaptability.
3D printing or additive manufacturing is a highly versatile
mode of manufacture that lends itself to adaptability.34 It has
been applied to the construction of structures from regolith
stimulants.35 3D printing permits the manufacture of structural
designs that cannot be manufactured through subtractive
techniques—it can construct complex shapes with complex internal geometries without specialized tooling. Component parts
may be merged into complex monolithic structures, reducing
the requirement for assembly joints and assembly tasks.
The implementation of 3D printing provides for the
monolithic construction of secondary structure such as support brackets and even mechanical joints integrated with
primary structures. It is a tool-less manufacturing technique
that minimizes waste through its additive property and recycling of feedstock. 3D structures are built up sequentially
layer-by-layer directly from a sliced CAD model. Layer
thickness resolution and density are determined by powder
particle size and additive processing parameters—metal
powders of optimal particle size *20–150 mm yield similar
layer thicknesses of 20–100 mm.
It is reckoned that subtractive methods require 10 times as
much material as that encapsulated in the final product—additive manufacturing almost eliminates this entirely and thus
affords a significant advantage for ISRU where waste is expensive in both material and energy.
The application of additive manufacturing to space and/or
planetary environments is challenging as well as offering advantages: (1) lack of atmosphere makes metal powder vacuum

232 NEW SPACE 2022

weld into clumps; (2) metal and ceramic powders are considered
a potential health hazard, but it is likely that ambient lunar dust
constitutes a greater threat; (3) ambient vacuum of the Moon
prevents oxidation during sintering/melting; (4) powder deposition is not conducive to microgravity environments, but this
condition is relaxed in low-gravity environments; (5) low gravity
may result in delamination between layers; and (6) low gravity
reduces support structure requirements.
The concern over the use of powder is moot in the context of
robotic factory facilities on the Moon as there is an ambient
gravity field (assistable by vibration) and there is no human
particulate infection issue in an automated factory environment.
The output of the Metalysis FFC process is metal alloy
powder that may serve as feedstock for powder metallurgy
and powder bed metal 3D printing. This bypasses the usual
step required for powder production through atomization of
molten metal by water jets. The high cooling rates yield particles of *1–500 mm of irregular shapes typically contaminated with oxides. Gas atomization by an inert gas such as
nitrogen or argon is superior yielding spherical particles with
an average particle size of 40 mm. Although smaller particle
sizes favor a smoother surface finish, <20-mm-sized particles
introduce flowability problems in the powder.
Nevertheless, the Metalysis FFC process forgoes this step by
powdering and sintering its original brittle oxide form using
traditional ball milling, which as ceramic particles, unlike
metal powders, are not subject to vacuum welding. After reduction to metal, the resultant metal is easily powdered and
then subjected to a wide range of 3D printing techniques.
The metallurgy of 3D-printed metal parts is essentially
similar to that of parts manufactured traditionally, but often
with superior physical properties such as hardness. Metal
additive manufacturing yields fully dense metal parts through
the omission of binders. The 2 commonly adopted metal 3D
printing platforms are as follows: (a) powder bed fusion (PBF)
and (b) direct energy deposition (DED). PBF is the most widely
adopted metal 3D printing technique for both laser and electron beam heating, the former being the most common approach.36 Metal powder from a dispenser is spread in a thin
layer of thickness *20–100 mm using a blade. The conductive
heat flow for a laser or electron beam is related to thermal
diffusivity D and specific heat per volume Cp.37 Power density,
Q, is given by the following:
Q qT
=
- D=2 T
Cp qt
Q ð 1 - RÞ
qT
P
where qT
qt = - v qt = cooling rate, Q = 2pr 2 k, T~ qCp x = temperature, P = power absorbed at the surface *100 kW/cm2, r =
beam spot radius, l = absorption length, R = material

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

reflectivity, and r = material density. In DED, the thermal
source—typically laser or electron beam—melts the powder or
wire as it is being deposited on the substrate similar to an
extrusion process and bears similarities to plasma arcwelding, in which a gas tungsten arc-based welding torch
deposits metal from wire feedstock in an inert gas, which is
milled to produce 3D structures.38
The commonest DED technique is powder-based laser deposition of metal39—the deposition head comprises laser optics, a pressurized powder nozzle, and inert gas tubing. The
powder may be fluidized either by an inert gas or by ultrasonic
vibration and focused into the laser at the substrate. The laser
creates a melt pool *0.25–1 mm diameter by 0.1–0.5 mm
depth (i.e., generating an average layer thickness *0.25–
0.5 mm) on the substrate.
Direct laser metal deposition involves feeding the metal
powder into the inert gas jet ejected from a nozzle onto the
laser-melt pool. The injected powder melts and solidifies as the
laser moves rapidly to another position. The deposition head
creates a track of solidified material as it scans, building a 3D
part layer-by-layer. With layer thicknesses of 40 mm to 1 mm,
build rates of 300 cm3/h can be achieved. For complex
structures, support material and/or a multiaxis deposition
head are required. Three-axis systems are common, but 4- or
5-axis systems using rotary tables or manipulator arms are
available.
DED techniques include laser-engineered net shaping
(LENS), direct metal deposition, laser-based metal deposition,
electron beam freeform fabrication (EBF3), and welding arcbased methods among others. They differ primarily in details
of the thermal energy source and material delivery. LENS
involves spraying metal powder (such as steel, Al, Cu, Ti, and
even tungsten) into a metal melt pool created by Nd:YAG laser
in a chamber with a controlled inert gas environment such as
Ar.40 Within the print head, the powder is supplied coaxially
from a nozzle to the laser beam focused by a lens, where a
metal melt pool is created. In fact, the metal particles do not
become molten until they reach the melt pool. The powder
most commonly uses gravity but can be conveyed by an inert
gas such as He or Ar.
PBF technology using either a laser beam or electron beam
heat source is the commonest of the metal additive
manufacturing processes.41 The beam interacts with metal
powder by converting beam energy (hf for laser and mv2/2 for
electron) into thermal energy. PBF includes selective laser
sintering/melting (SLS/M) and electron beam melting (EBM).
The laser or electron beam energy source scans a pattern onto
a bed of metal powder spread over the worktable. Where the
powder is scanned, it forms a thin layer of sintered or melted

metal, which then solidifies. Once each layer is complete, the
work platform is depressed and another layer of metal powder
is rolled across and the process repeated until the 3D part has
been constructed. The powder bed may act as sacrificial
support for overhanging features.
However, large overhangs may require tapering to reduce
the need for dedicated sacrificial supports. Both DED and PBF
approaches yield poor surface finish (*25 mm) and poor dimensional accuracy (*0.25 mm), with DED offering inferior
small-scale featuring than PBF.
In SLS/M, a 200 W laser with a spot size of 500–100 mm is
typically scanned using mirrors to melt the metal powder—part
tolerance is limited to laser spot size, while the powder size
determines layer thickness and surface smoothness. The 2-most
commonly used lasers are CO2 and Nd:YAG—the CO2 laser
operates at higher power and efficiency, but the higher frequency Nd:YAG laser exhibits higher absorptivity to the material and requires lower power. Absorptivity of most materials
is much less at CO2 laser wavelengths than at Nd:YAG laser
wavelengths, and so, higher CO2 laser power is required.
SLS/M involves using the laser to sinter or melt a layer of
metal powder into a solid within a noble gas atmosphere—Ar
for reactive metals or N2 for nonreactive metals. The process is
controlled through laser power, scanning speed, hatching
distance, and layer thickness—the scan strategy requires the
melt track to overlap the hatch distance. Hatching defines the
spacing between the centers of 2 consecutive laser/electron
beams and influences the trade of production speed, laser
power, and material porosity. Selective laser melting (SLM) is
an advanced form of SLS, which melts rather than sinters the
powder to give denser parts. SLM has been used to fabricate
pure tantalum to within >99% of full density.
However, SLS/M is not well suited to Al powders due to the
formation of oxides on all its surfaces, which encourages
balling.42 Such oxide formation would not occur in the vacuum of the Moon. Fast cooling rates minimize nonequilibrium
phases, secondary phases (such as carbide inclusions), and
brittle intermetallic phases due to the fine structure imposed
by rapid solidification. The rapid movement of lasers ensures
high cooling rates *103–105C/s. Each thin layer fuses with
the previously deposited layer as it is deposited by the laser
beam that scans its 2-dimensional shape on the powder bed.
The Renishaw SLM facilities in Kitchener Ontario offer 200
and 400 W laser powder bed machines typically with a 70 mm
laser spot size. The machines can be fitted with a reduced build
volume to allow testing and parameter development on small
quantities of powder. They can deposit a range of metallic alloys
in powder form. Figure 3 illustrates SLS-printed test structures
from Ti powder created by the Metalysis FFC process.

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10 NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 233

ELLERY ET AL.

directed by a scanning magnetic field
generated by a deflection coil. A metal
powder is raked across the work platform into a 50–200 mm layer. The highpowered electron gun scans the metal
particle bed where the electron kinetic
energy is converted into thermal melting
of the metal powder with a deposited
power of *106 W/mm2 to generate
2,000C peak temperatures followed by
rapid cooling.
EBAM requires a vacuum of 10-4–
Fig. 3. (a) Synthetic rutile feedstock; (b) titanium powder resulting from reduced synthetic
rutile powder.
10-5 mbar, which reduces oxidation
contamination and is sometimes supplemented by He gas to aid metal cooling. The process is
SLS/M is a sophisticated 3D printing process suitable for
different types of powdered material—metal, ceramic, glass,
controlled through multiple process parameters—beam power,
and polymer including tungsten as well as more commonly
scanning velocity, beam focus, beam diameter, line spacing,
used metals.43 Direct laser sintering of mixtures of elemental
preheating strategy, platform temperature, and scanning
powders has yielded high-strength and hardness alloys.44
strategy. Preheating the powder bed to bring the temperature
Ceramics tend to crack due to the high temperatures required,
close to the sinter temperature at 700–1,100C reduces the
which induce thermal shock on cooling—however, ceramic
energy requirements and reduces thermal stresses.
printing is feasible in a eutectic mixture to reduce the melting
Deposited material is built up layer-by-layer to create fully
temperatures, for example, the introduction of Al2O3 to SiO2
dense 3D net shape parts with high strength without the need
for further heat treatment. The material must have a low vapor
forms a salt eutectic mixture with a lower melting point that
can be accommodated by solar concentrators.
pressure near its melting point, which includes most metals
but excludes nonmetals as the electron beam needs to couple
Nevertheless, direct laser sintering of 50 mm ball-milled
silica sand has been demonstrated using a 120 W CO2 laser at
electrically to the material. Most metals—steel, nickel alloys,
1,060 nm moving at 120 mm/s coupled with 400C preheating
cobalt alloys, copper/nickel alloys, aluminum alloys, titanium
of the powder bed sealed in nitrogen to yield localized 1,200C
alloys, tantalum and tungsten but not zinc, cadmium or
45
melting and solidification in a spot size of 50–200 mm. This
magnesium alloys—can be electron beam processed. Electron
technique may be exploited to build casting molds for metals.
beams are much more efficient in converting electrical energy
Selective laser sintering may also be used for polymers46 alinto thermal energy than lasers; electron beams require a
vacuum and powders are difficult to handle under microthough fused deposition modeling is far more common. Metal
powder may be combined with a polymeric binder, which is
gravity conditions favoring wire feed (Fig. 4).
deposited at low temperature. This is binder jetting uses 2
materials47—a metal/ceramic powder and a binder cementing
the powder together.
The metal powder is spread and a layer of binder in liquid
form is deposited over the powder layer. Each layer is deposited
consecutively. Once the green part has been built, it can be bulksintered at high temperature—postcuring may also be necessary, which can be complicated, but it can process a wide range
of materials; however, the part porosity is inferior to SLM and
electron beam additive manufacturing (EBAM).
EBAM involves a high-power (around 4 kW), thermionically
driven electron gun—a heated oxide-coated tungsten filament
emits hot electrons that are accelerated at 60 kV to high velocity.
They are focused into a beam spot of *0.1 mm diameter by an
Fig. 4. 3D-printed structures from Metalysis FFC process-derived Ti
electromagnetic lens formed by an electrical focusing coil and
powder.

234 NEW SPACE 2022

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

The National Research Council of
Canada’s Sciaky EBAM system is capable of depositing metallic materials
in a vacuum operational environment
using a wire feedstock (Fig. 5a, b).
Figure 5c and d illustrates EBAM
structures built from Ti alloy and Ni
wires, respectively. Specific advantages of the EBAM process are the
relatively large build envelope, near
100% material efficiency of the wirefeed into the melt pool and high bulk
material deposition rates of 200–
600 mm3/s depending on feature size
and material. Also, the build envelope of the EBAM, limited by the
vacuum environment under terrestrial conditions, is not constrained on
the Moon.
Microgravity testing of an EBAM
system onboard NASA’s reduced gravity aircraft demonstrated the deposition
Fig. 5. Wire-fed EBAM (a) schematic of process, (b) Al alloy wire deposition, (c) Ti alloy performance to be equivalent to 1 G
structure, and (d) Ni alloy structure. EBAM, electron beam additive manufacturing.
conditions.51 The sintered metal powder rods from the Metalysis FFC process
EBM is similar to SLM except that an electron beam replaces
may potentially be designed to be wire-fed into EBAM, but we
the laser beam as the thermal source.48 It operates similarly to
are yet to demonstrate this.
a scanning electron microscope or electron beam welder.
The controlled processing parameters for SLS/M are laser
Electron beams have higher beam power but lower traverse
power P * 200 W, scan speed v * 120 mm/s, hatch distance
speeds, yielding reduced cooling rates than lasers. To reduce
between tracks h * 0.1 mm, and powder layer thickness
layer corrugation, different layers may be deposited in rand * 20–100 mm, and for EBM are electron beam voltage
domly different scan directions. Wire feeding offers reduced
(20–60 keV), current *1–50 mA, focus diameter *0.1 mm
porosity at the expense of dimensional accuracy. EBF3 is
diameter, scan rate, preheat temperature, and powder layer
similar to direct laser deposition but based on electron beam
thickness *50–200 mm. The delivered specific energy/area for
welding.49
full density in both cases is given by the following:
Metal wire feedstock—due to the difficulty in using powder
P
u = vhd
~60 - 70 J=mm2
in a vacuum—is melted in a 30–40 kW electron beam within a
vacuum. It generates a focused electron beam in a highvacuum chamber offering 100% feedstock consumption with
Electron beams offer higher build rates *80 cm3/h com95% energy efficiency due to excellent electron coupling to
pared with *5–20 cm3/h for lasers due to the increased
the metal melt pool. The melted feedstock creates a molten
penetration depth and rapid scanning speed. Both SLM and
pool only *10 mm thick on the substrate plate. EBF3 yields
EBAM can print common metals including stainless steel
parts with excellent physical properties with high deposition
such as 316L, aluminum alloys such as AlSi10Mg, titanium
rates of 2,500 cm3/h.50 EBF3 using wire feedstock is suited to
alloys such as Ti6Al4V, nickel-based superalloys such as
rapid 3D printing of a wide range of metal alloys. Once the
Inconel 625/718, and cobalt/cobalt-chromium superalloys
focused electron beam strikes the target, several types of
such as CoCrMo. Volatile elements with relatively low
emissions result requiring careful design and shielding: (1)
boiling points such as Zn that generate turbulent melt pools
low-energy secondary electrons *keV, (2) backscattered
are unsuited to additive manufacturing (Zn is rare on the
electrons; and (3) low-energy X-rays.
Moon).

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10

NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 235

ELLERY ET AL.

Similar arguments apply to Mg-based alloys, which we
have discarded on the basis of their marginal utility on the
Moon. Electron beams tend to yield rougher surface finish
than lasers and inferior dimensional accuracy, but they yield
stronger structures. Subsequent surface treatment may be
implemented with electron beam glazing using a defocused
beam. Electron beams are generally favored because electron
beams are more efficiently generated than laser beams—
electric power is a scarcer resource than thermal power on the
Moon by virtue of electrical conversion losses.
Typically, postprocessing such as milling, polishing, shot
peening, or hot isostatic processing (HIP) are commonly
implemented—HIP is effective in removing surface porosity
defects. In all additive manufacturing using thermal sources,
high-energy deposition can cause residual stresses and layer
warping. Residual stress occurs when melting a new layer on
an underlying solid layer—as the molten layer solidifies, it
contracts inducing shear stresses between layers, which can
generate distortion of the part.
Preheating the build platform chamber to intermediate
temperatures at *200–500C between the sample recrystallization and melting temperature and shorter scan lengths
alleviates these high thermal gradients and the consequent
internal stresses. Typically, the powder bed is subjected to a
multipass, rapid preheating scan *10 m/s to 40%–60% of
melting temperature (nominally *700–900C) to reduce
thermal gradients and so residual stresses.
This is followed by the melting stage at low scan speed
*0.5 m/s to melt the powder. The addition of postheating of
layers can encourage annealing of thermal dislocation defects. Laser cusing divides each layer into a number of regions
(islands) randomly selected for processing to reduce systematic stresses in the material.
The complex thermal cycling of rapid melting and then
rapid solidification leads to high-temperature gradients and
metastable microstructures. These high thermal gradients
between layers can degrade the material’s microstructure.
Control of process parameters such as scan/print speed and
thermal power to control the microstructure has proven difficult—lower scan speeds impart greater thermal power to the
metal. However, the addition of nanoparticle inoculants
mixed into molten metal can seed crystal nuclei during solidification, for example, ferrosilicon in iron52 or hydrogenstabilized zirconium in aluminum alloy.53
Although ferrosilicon is feasible, zirconium is not recovered
in the lunar industrial ecology. Additive manufacturing is a
relatively young technology that is continually improving with
time, but it offers multiple advantages. It constitutes a singletechnology system that is universal in its functional versatility

236 NEW SPACE 2022

to print sophisticated parts—including potentially electric motors constituting the key to printing entire robotic machines54—
and is sustainable because of its uniqueness to minimize material waste and wasted energy on processing such waste.

CONCLUSIONS
We have examined the merits of the electrochemical Metalysis FFC process and its utility for lunar use. In particular,
we took note of its low electrical energy consumption compared with its more readily available thermal energy consumption and the high purity of its metal output. We described
2 strategies for deploying the Metalysis FFC process: (1) for
direct mineral reduction to produce mongrel alloys; and (2)
with preprocessing before the process.
The need for a multitude of specific elemental metals for
specific purposes suggests that the Metalysis FFC process
may be supplemented with a modest set of geochemical
preprocessing techniques. This provides the backbone of
our lunar industrial ecology, a small network system of
chemical processes in which there is minimal waste through
recycling.
We then explored how the unique solid-state metal powders
involved in the Metalysis FFC process lend themselves to
the next stage of processing of metals using additive
manufacturing, an approach that minimizes waste. In particular, the Metalysis FFC process in conjunction with metal
3D printing as part of an efficient processing chain appears a
promising technological pair with widespread applications in
the lunar context, potentially fulfilling the manufacture of
components and systems of robotic machines of production.
Essentially, the 2 processes—the Metalysis FFC process and
metal 3D printing—form the backbone of a manufacturing
system to convert comminuted/beneficiated raw metal
material into final products. These 2 methods in partnership
offer unprecedented capabilities in deep ISRU of in situ
manufacturing of final components directly from lunar material. Such a capability could provide for the in situ construction of productive capacity on the Moon with enormous
transformative implications for space exploration.
For the future, we propose that a small technological
demonstrator of the preprocessing methods, the Metalysis FFC
process and additive manufacturing facility, should be constructed in preparation for a flight technical demonstration on
the Moon in a small scale.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Metalysis Ltd for the assistance and
support for this article. There were, however, no financial
transactions associated with this article.

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

METALYSIS FFC PROCESS

AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
No competing financial interests exist.

FUNDING INFORMATION
No funding was received for this article.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary Data S1
REFERENCES
1. Matthews A. Crystallisation of anatase and rutile from amorphous titanium
dioxide under hydrothermal conditions. Am Mineral. 1976;61:419–24.
2. Yang F, Hlavacek V. Effective extraction of titanium from rutile by a lowtemperature chloride process. AIChE J. 2000;46(2):355–60.
3. Hu D, Dolganov A, Ma M, Bhattacharya B, Bishop M, Chen G. Development of
the Fray-Farthing-Chen Cambridge process: Towards the sustainable
production of titanium and its alloys. J Met. 2018;70(2):129–37.
4. Chen G, Fray D, Farthing T. Direct electrochemical reduction of titanium dioxide
to titanium in molten calcium chloride. Nature. 2000;407:361–63.
5. Mohandas K, Fray D. FFC Cambridge process and removal of oxygen from
metal-oxygen systems by molten salt electrolysis: An overview. Trans Indian
Inst Met. 2004;57(6):579–92.
6. Jaio S, Fray D. Development of an inert anode for electrowinning in calcium
chloride-calcium oxide melts. Metall Mater Trans B. 2010;41(1):74–9.
7. Dey S, Dhal C. Catalytic conversion of carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide
over spinel catalysts: An overview. Mater Sci Energy Technol. 2019;2:575–88.
8. Rabl A. Comparison of solar concentrators. Sol Energy. 1976;18(2–4):93–111.
9. Hedgepath J, Miller R. Structural concepts for large solar concentrators. NASA
CR-4075. 1987. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19870012561 (Last Acceesed on
December 10, 2021).
10. Nakaruma T, Smith B. Solar power system for lunar ISRU applications. 48th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and
Aerospace Exposition, Orlando, FL, AIAA 2010–1162. AIAA Reprint. 2010.
11. Gryaznov G, Zhabotinskii E, Zrodnikov A, Nikolaev N, Ponamarev-Stepnoi N,
Pupko V, Serbin V, Usov V. Thermoemission reactor-converters for nuclear
power units in outer space. Atomnaya Energiya. 1998;66(6):374–77.
12. Gyftopoulos E and Hatsopoulos G. Thermionic nuclear reactors. Electr Eng.
1963;108–16.
13. Meir S, Stephanos C, Gebelle T, Mannhart J. Highly efficient thermoelectronic
conversion of solar energy and heat into electric power. J Renewable
Sustainable Energy. 2013;5:043127.
14. Trucci D, Bellucci A, Cappelli E, Calvani P, Orlando S, Sciti D, Yogev R, Kribus A.
(2012) Thermionic emission: A different path to solar thermal electricity. In:
Proceedings on SolarPaces, Marrakesh, Morocco.
15. Kribus A, Segev G. Solar energy conversion with photon-enhanced thermionic
emission. J Opt. 2016;18:073001.
16. Schwede J, Bargstin I, Riley D, Hardin B, Rosenthal S, Sun Y, Schmitt F, Pianetta
P, Howe R, Shen X-Z, Melosh N. Photon-enhanced thermionic emission for
solar concentrator systems. Nat Mater. 2010;9:762–7.
17. Shinke R, Bansode R, Bhosale C, Rajpure K. Physical properties of haematite aFe2O3 thin films: Application to photoelectrochemical solar cells. J
Semiconductors. 2011;32:(1):013001.
18. Criswell D, Curreri P. Photovoltaics using in-situ resource utilization for HEDS.
In: Proceedings on 6th ASCE Specialty Conf on Engineering Construction and
Operations in Albuquerque, NM Space, 40339(206)34. 1998
19. Frendlich A, Ignatiev A, Horton C, Duke M, Curreri P, Sibille L. Manufacture of
solar cells on the Moon. In: IEEE Record 31st Photovoltaic Specialists
Conference. Lake Buena Vista, FL, 2005;794–7.
20. Schwandt C, Hamilton J, Fray D, Crawford I. Production of oxygen and metal
from lunar regolith. Planet Space Sci. 2012;74:49–56.

21. Lomax B, Conti M, Khan N, Bennett N, Ganin A, Symes M. Proving the viability of
an electrochemical process for the simultaneous extraction of oxygen and
production of metal alloys from lunar regolith. Planet Space Sci. 2020;180:104748.
22. Oosthuizen S. In search of low-cost titanium: The Fray Farthing Chen
Cambridge process. J South Afr Inst Min Metall. 2011;111(3):199–2006.
23. Papike J, Taylor L, Simon S. Lunar minerals. In: Heiken G, Vaniman D, French B,
Schmitt J (ed.). Lunar Sourcebook: A User’s Guide to the Moon. 1991:121–81.
24. Balla K, Roberson L, O’Connor G, Trigwell S, Bose S, Bandyopadhyay A. First
demonstration on direct laser fabrication of lunar regolith parts. Rapid
Prototyping J. 2012;18(6):451–7.
25. Pak V, Kirov S, Nalivaiko A, Ozherelkov D, Gromov A. Obtaining alumina from
kaolin clay via aluminium chloride. Materials (Basel). 2019;12(23):3938.
26. Landis G. Materials refining on the Moon. Acta Astronaut. 2007;60:906–15.
27. Sargent P, Derby B. Advanced alloys and metal/ceramic composites from lunar
source materials. Acta Astronaut. 1982;9(9):593–5.
28. Nohira T, Yasuda K, Ito Y. Pinpoint and bulk electrochemical reduction of
insulating silicon dioxide to silicon. Nat Mater. 2003;2:397–401.
29. Jacob K, Srikanth S. Physical chemistry of the reduction of calcium oxide with
aluminium in vacuum. High Temp Mater Processes. 1990;9(2–4):77–92.
30. Fenn A, Cooley G, Fray D, Smith L. Exploiting the FFC Cambridge process. Adv
Mater Processes. 2004;51–2.
31. Tripathy P, Fray D. On the preparation of TiAl alloy by direct reduction of the
oxide mixtures in calcium chloride melt. Fray International Symposium. In:
Gibson I, Rosen D, Stucker B (eds.). Idaho National Laboratory, Additive
Manufacturing Technologies, New York, NY: Springer Publishers, INL/CON-1020068. 2011. https://inldigitallibrary.inl.gov/sites/sti/sti/5394111.pdf (Last Accessed on December 10, 2021).
32. xSafak K, Adams G. Modeling and simulation of an artificial muscle and its
application to biomimetic robot posture control. Robot Auton Syst. 2002;41:
225–43.
33. Lynch B, Jiang X-X, Ellery A, Nitzsche F. Characterisation, modelling and control
of NiTi shape memory alloy based on electrical resistance feedback. J Intell
Mater Syst Struct. 2016. DOI: 10.1177/1045389X16633764
34. Pham D, Dimov S. Rapid prototyping and rapid tooling—the key enablers for
rapid manufacturing. Proc Inst Mech Eng C J Mech Eng Sci. 2003;217:1–23.
35. Cesaretti G, Dini E, De Kestellier X, Clla V, Pambaguian L. Building components
for an outpost on the lunar soil by means of a novel 3D printing technology.
Acta Astronaut. 2014;93:430–50.
36. Herzog D, Seyda V, Wycusk E, Emmelmann C. Additive manufacturing of metals.
Acta Mater. 2016;117:371–92.
37. Murr L. Metallurgy of additive manufacturing: Examples from electron beam
melting. Addit Manuf. 2015;5:40–53.
38. Gibson I, Rosen D, Stucker B. Directed energy deposition processes. Addit
Manuf Technol 2015;245–68.
39. Copley S, Martukanitz R. Frazier W, Rigdon M. Mechanical properties of parts
formed by laser additive manufacturing. Adv Mater Process. 2011;169:26–9.
40. Griffith M, Keicher D, Atwood C, Romero J, Smugeresky J, Harwell L, Greene D.
Free form fabrication of metallic components using laser engineered net
shaping (LENSTM). Proc Int Solid Freeform Fabrication Symp. 1996.
41. Bhavar V, Kattire P, Patil V, Khot S, Gujar K, Singh. Review on powder bed fusion
technology of metal additive manufacturing. In: Proceeding of 4th International
Conference & Expo Additive Manufacturing Technologies, Bangalore, India. 2014.
42. Olakanmi E, Cochrane R, Dalgarno K. Review on selective laser sintering/melting
(SLS/SLM) of aluminium alloy powders: Processing, microstructure and
properties. Prog Mater Sci. 2015;74:401–77.
43. Pham D, Dimov S, Lacan F. Selective laser sintering: Applications and
technological capabilities. Proc Inst Mech Eng B. 1999;233:435–49.
44. Sinchi A, Petzoldt F, Pohl H. On the development of direct metal laser sintering
for rapid tooling. J Mater Process Technol. 2003;141:319–28.
45. Tang Y, Fuh J, Loh H, Wong Y, Lu L. Direct laser sintering of a silica sand. Mater
Des. 2003;24:623–9.
46. Bourell D, Watt T, Leigh D, Fulcher B. Performance limitations in polymer laser
sintering. Physics Procedia. 2014;56:147–56.

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 10

NO. 2  2022

NEW SPACE 237

ELLERY ET AL.

47. Gokuldoss P, Kolla S, Eckert J. Additive manufacturing processes: Selective laser
melting, electron beam melting and binder jetting—selection guidelines.
Materials. 2017;10:672.
48. Gong X, Anderson T, Chou K. Review on powder-based electron beam additive
manufacturing technology. Manuf Rev. 2014;1:2–12.
49. Taminger K, Hafley R. Electron beam freeform fabrication (EBF3) for
cost-effective near-net shape manufacturing. NASA TM 2006-214284.
2006. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/10516644.pdf (Last accessed on December 10, 2021).
50. Taminger K, Hafley R. Electron beam freeform fabrication: A rapid metal
deposition process. In: Proceedings of Society of Plastics Engineers 3rd Annual
Automotive Composites Conference. Troy, MI, 2003.
51. Hafley R, Taminger K, Bird R. Electron beam freeform fabrication in the space
environment. In: Proceedings of 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting &
Exhibit. Reno, NV, 2007;1154.
52. Todd I. No more tears for metal 3D printing. Nature. 2017;549:342–3.

238 NEW SPACE 2022

53. Martin J, Yahata B, Hundley J, Mayer J, Schaedler T, Pollock T. 3D printing of
high strength aluminium alloys. Nature. 2017;549:365–9.
54. Ellery A. Universal construction based on 3D printing electric motors. In: IEEE
International Symposium on Robotics & Intelligent Sensors (IRIS), Ottawa,
Canada, 2017:81–5.

Address correspondence to:
Alex Ellery
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department
Carleton University
1125 Colonel by Drive
Ottawa K1S 5B6
Canada
E-mail: aellery@mae.carleton.ca

ª MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

