JOURNAL OF SPACECRAFT AND ROCKETS
Vol. 53, No. 2, March-April 2016

Are Self-Replicating Machines Feasible?
Alex Ellery∗
Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6, Canada

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409
Recent developments in three-dimensional printing technology have introduced the prospect of self-replication in
the context of robotic in situ resource utilization on the moon. The value of three-dimensional printing lies in its
potential to implement universal construction. A universal constructor is a machine capable of fabricating any
physical product given an appropriate program of instructions, suitable raw materials, and a source of energy in an
appropriate form. Such physical products include a copy of itself; a universal constructor is by definition a selfreplicating machine. A step in this direction is represented by the RepRap three-dimensional printer that can print
copies of its own plastic components. The three-dimensional printing of actuators and associated control electronics
would represent an existence proof that an appropriately designed robotic three-dimensional printer system would
constitute a universal constructor. In this paper, preliminary attempts have been outlined to develop self-replicating
machines by addressing the three-dimensional-printable actuator and electronics aspects within the materials limits
imposed by the moon. It is concluded that physical self-replicating machines are within reach. This lunar
infrastructure offers space-based geoengineering solutions in the short term and solar power satellite solutions in the
long term to the global climate crisis.

recently [8,9]. Here, we explore this lunar self-replicating machine
concept with regard to material closure. We do not consider certain
practical issues such as dust mitigation at this stage, which is a generic
lunar problem rather than specific to self-replication [10].
The power of a self-replicating machine is obvious. It can construct
any number of copies of itself extremely rapidly; its population grows
as ∼x  1n , where x is the number of offspring per generation, and
n is the generation number (Table 1).
Once sufficient numbers of self-replicating machines have been
manufactured, they can then be programmed to manufacture the desired
products in parallel, demonstrating exponential productive capacity, an
economic exponentiator. Consider a typical launch cost of $20,000 per
kilogram to low Earth orbit (LEO); we may assume that this increases
by two orders of magnitude to $2 million per kilogram to the surface of
the moon. A 1 t “seed factory” launched to the moon would thus cost
$2 billion. If it self-replicates 1000 copies of itself (in under seven
generations), the cost drops to $2000 per kilogram, which drops further
to only $20 per kilogram for 100,000 copies and $2 per kilogram for 1
million copies (in under 13 generations). This dwarfs projected launch
cost savings (∼90%) expected from single-stage-to-orbit launch
technology to LEO such as the Skylon spaceplane concept. Full selfreplication offers not just parallel processing throughput but exponential
processing throughput. Hence, self-replication acts as a matter
exponentiator rather than a mere multiplier, offering many orders of
magnitude enhancement in productive capacity.
Self-replicating machines are premised on the ability to use raw
materials to bootstrap themselves. In situ resource utilization (ISRU),
the exploitation of extraterrestrial resources, has become topical with
the proposed lunar Resource Prospector Mission (RPM) to demonstrate fundamental ISRU technologies in 2020. It comprises three
main elements. A 72 kg payload package RESOLVE (from “regolith
and environment science and oxygen and lunar volatiles extraction”)
is to demonstrate the extraction of water ice from the lunar surface
and to generate oxygen through hydrogen reduction of ilmenite in
recovered regolith. A lunar rover will carry this package to locations
at the lunar South Pole and extract subsurface samples using a drill.
This provides us with a starting point from which to explore a selfreplicating machine concept later.
The most critical issue for self-replication is the necessity for near
100% matter, energy, and information closure to ensure that the
system’s functionality exceeds its structure [3,7,11,12]. For 100%
closure, the self-replicating factory needs to manufacture every
component part of itself and all the tools necessary to manufacture
those components. The parts list grows exponentially with the
number of unique parts, and so standardization will be essential.
Furthermore, each component has associated with it a portfolio of
processes involved in its creation. It is desirable to minimize the

Nomenclature
ac
f·
t
wij
xi
yi
β
ρ
σ

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

solar-sail acceleration, mm∕s2
nonlinear neural squashing function
solar-sail thickness
synaptic weight between neuron i and neuron j
neural input to neuron i
neural output of neuron i
solar-sail lightness factor
solar-sail volume density, g∕m3
solar-sail mass/unit area, g∕m2

I.

Introduction

S

ELF-REPLICATION as a concept dates back to von Neumann,
who developed the concept of the universal constructor [1]. Such
a universal constructor by definition can construct anything,
including a copy of itself, given the appropriate programming, energy
supplies, and availability of parts. It comprises an idealized robotic
arm that picks parts from its environment to build a copy of itself, its
control system, and its program of instructions. It was subsequently
discovered that DNA replication follows precisely this same logic
[2]. The reader is referred to the remarkable “bunny book” [3] for
further information of the development of self-replication theory.
Most theory was developed from cellular automata models from
which self-replicating programs (without universal construction
capability) as the basis of artificial life were derived [4,5]. These
theoretical models do not concern us here. Von Neumann’s original
kinematic models were discarded in favor of cellular automata
models but more recently have been revived [6]. Rather than review
the extensive literature on the theory of self-replication, we present
only the few engineering-based efforts toward practical realization of
self-replicating systems. It is worth mentioning, in particular, the
landmark NASA study on self-replication applied to lunar exploration [7], aspects of which have been developed further more

Presented as Paper 2015-4653 at the AIAA Space 2015 Conference and
Exposition, Pasadena, CA, 31 August 2015–2 September 2015; received 5
August 2015; revision received 28 October 2015; accepted for publication 7
December 2015; published online 26 February 2016. Copyright © 2015 by
Alex Ellery. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Inc., with permission. Copies of this paper may be made for
personal and internal use, on condition that the copier pay the per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center (CCC). All requests for copying and permission to
reprint should be submitted to CCC at www.copyright.com; employ the ISSN
0022-4650 (print) or 1533-6794 (online) to initiate your request.
*Associate Professor, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, 1125 Colonel By Drive.
317

318

ELLERY

Table 1

Self-replication as a matter amplifier

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

Number of offspring
Number of
per generation (x)
generations (n)
1
10
2
7
2
13

Resultant
population
1024
2187
1,594,323

amount of imported material (vitamins). The composition of every
component imposes a demandite requirement while in situ resources
offer only limited satisfaction of those requirements. The only way to
achieve closure is to minimize the diversity of material, diversity of
parts, and diversity of manufacturing processes. That is what is
addressed here.
The self-replicating machine is premised on a high degree of
automation and robotics [13,14]. This of course is a critical question
that cannot be addressed in detail here, but robotics has advanced
enormously over the years. One means to enhance automation is to
control the local environment to reduce the incidence of “surprises”;
this is how automated factories (lights-out automation) and
biological cells implement their complex processes. Another critical
issue concerns human–machine interfacing and the division of labor
between humans and robotics [15,16]. Although there is no question
of astronaut involvement on the moon, telesupervisory control/
monitoring from Earth (or the vicinity of the moon) is feasible.
Robotic on-orbit servicing involving complex manipulation tasks has
been addressing issues regarding teleoperation from Earth by ground
controllers [17]. However, human–machine interfaces must cope
with time delays inherent in signal transmission [18–20]. Nevertheless, the degree of telesupervisory human intervention must be
minimized as the rapid growth of the machine population on the lunar
surface makes human intervention impractical.

II.

Three-Dimensional Printer as Universal Constructor

Recently, three-dimensional (3-D) printing has emerged as a
generalized manufacturing capability. It is a layered/additive
manufacturing technique with wide versatility for printing organic
tissue, food, pharmaceuticals, etc. The recent delivery of a glovebox
thermoplastic extrusion 3-D printer to the International Space Station
is testament to the application of 3-D printing to space exploration
[21]. 3-D printing manufactures raw material powder into structural
products by fusing the powder layer by layer. There are several
additive manufacturing methods, the most common being fused
deposition modeling (FDM), selective laser sintering (SLS), and
stereolithography [22,23]. SLS is particularly versatile in that it can
process metals, plastics, and ceramics, but they do require different
environmental conditions, making integrated multimaterial structures infeasible currently. Furthermore, for self-replication, the
construction of a laser presents certain difficulties. Although metal
can be processed through laser sintering [24,25], electron beam
freeform fabrication (EBF3) is another option for metal printing [26].
The great advantage of EBF3 is that it works on the principle of the
electron gun, a high-powered high-voltage vacuum tube (introduced
later for electronic applications). Demonstration of metal powdering
would be a critical capability for handling metal with any 3-D metal
printer. A thermal lance may be used to process ceramics in casts
(using 3-D printed molds), whereas plastic products may be
manufactured through FDM; this eliminates the need for complex
inefficient lasers. The primary limitation of 3-D printing technology,
however, resides in its serial nature, which has prevented it from
growing beyond prototyping functions [27].
An important inspiration was the development of the opensource RepRap (from “replicating rapid” prototyper) 3-D printer
(Fig. 1) [28].
The RepRap is based on plastic FDM for constructing complex
geometries, including its own plastic parts. This a first step toward the
development of self-replication capability. Currently, RepRap can
replicate only its plastic parts that comprise its simplest structural
parts. To close the self-replication loop, the 3-D printer must be able

to 3-D print its other parts: 1) threaded metal rods that provide
structural rigidity, 2) joining (that may be replaced with cement/
adhesive, 3) electric motors, 4) electronics and computer controller,
and 5) sensors. To enhance its self-replication capability, RepRap
requires additional functions. To include self-assembly of its parts
into its repertoire, it must possess an assembling wrist/hand
constructed from multiple motors. To search and extract its own raw
materials, it must include a mobility system constructed from motors
and associated rover capabilities in prospecting to acquire and mine
raw materials. To be fully autonomous, it must include an energy
generation system. Thus, the motor provides the central linchpin for
self-replication capability.

III.

Three-Dimensional Printable Electric Motor

3-D printing is currently limited to printing structures, although it
can print complex structures that cannot be manufactured through
any other means. However, printing only structures significantly
limits the repertoire of 3-D printing. In terms of mechanisms, only
kinematic joints have been successfully printed but not motors per se
[29] (e.g., Fig. 2), though there have been a few attempts to 3-D print
plastic components for motors by hobbyists.
All 3-D printers are in essence Cartesian robots comprising a
deposition table and a printing head with three degrees of freedom
(DOFs) relative movement. Further DOFs may be added by
reconfiguring joints as serial manipulators, adding wheels for
mobility, etc. All these mechanisms involve motors. Any selfreplicating 3-D printer must be able to manufacture not only all its
structural members but also its actuators, sensors, and electronics.
We have been developing several electric motor system concepts
as our proof of principle of self-replication using 3-D printing as a
universal constructor mechanism. A complete motor system
comprises the actuator, control electronics, and sensors as well as
the structural material in a complex configuration. Electric motors are
often performance-limited by thermal limits, and so any viable
electric motor must incorporate thermal control considerations. We
present the corollary that if it is possible to 3-D print a complete motor
system, it is possible to print almost any physical machine (defined as
a mechanism) to realize almost any arbitrary function we may wish to
impose. Although 3-D printing under reduced gravity has not been
addressed specifically here, pumps will be required to address this
issue in which the motor will constitute the core component. The
motor (and the nature of the printing head) determines the resolution
of layering of 3-D printing; for instance, the MakerBot Replicator
offers 100 μm resolution.
Following a review of different approaches to actuation to attempt
to minimize design complexity, we initially prototyped a shape
memory alloy (SMA) actuated motor design based on our previous
experience with continuous control of SMA actuators [30]. Another
desirable characteristic is the ability to implement zero-delay

Fig. 1 Fully constructed RepRap 3-D printer.

ELLERY

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

Fig. 2

319

3-D printed a) one-third size model, and b) actual Kapvik microrover chassis.

Fig. 3 Prototype 3-D-printable plastic-based electric motor concept.

“preflexes,” nonlinear physical viscoelastic behavior for robust
compliance useful for assembly manipulation tasks traditionally
implemented passively using remote center compliance mechanisms.
SMA wire “muscles” of Nitinol yield practical strains of 4% through
self-resistance heating. The first prototype used Nitinol wires
operating in antagonistic pairs through a cam-based rotor to convert
linear contraction into rotary motion (Fig. 3). The plastic parts were
3-D printed in-house.
This design was hampered by the first lesson in the limitations of
3-D printing; the coarse layering yielded excessive friction between
the working plastic parts. To circumvent this problem to demonstrate
the motor principle, a second design (Fig. 4) was constructed from
aluminium/steel to eliminate the friction problem. It successfully
demonstrated rotary motion.
Although the torque output was excellent, the heating/cooling
cycle limited the angular speed to around 1 Hz. This would be further
exacerbated in a vacuum environment where convective heat
rejection by air would not be available. Furthermore, the limited 4%
stroke of the SMAwire required a significant wire length, making the
assembly too complex. A third design based on piezoelectric
“fingers” was discarded due to the brittleness of quartz; we are
restricted to quartz, which is more readily manufactured from lunar
resources than the more elastic polyvinylide fluoride.

Fig. 4

Prototype 3-D-printable metal-based electric motor concept.

We have adopted a more conventional concept initially with a dc
motor configuration to test the motor core construction. A motor core
comprises layers of silicon steel laminated with an insulator material:
in our case, plastic (Fig. 5). The operation of the motor is far superior
to the SMA versions, offering very high rotation frequency (which
can be geared for high torque), illustrating the reasons why smart
materials have yet to supplant traditional motors in most applications [31].
The alternated layering construction lends itself to 3-D printing;
this is in progress. There are, however, considerable hurdles to
overcome that highlight many of the limitations of 3-D printing. In
particular, the limitation of constructing a complex moving part that
comprises several different materials. We have used a Renishaw
selective laser sinterer (SLS) to print the steel layers of the motor core
with spacing for the plastic insulation (Fig. 6) but printed it as a
monolithic unit using interlayer struts (constraint imposed by the
high cost of setup).
This is hot off the press, but this configuration will introduce eddy
current pathways into the core. This is the first of many prototypes
with which we shall be experimenting and testing. We are in the
process of experimenting with iron particles dispersed in a plastic
matrix, though this approach is expected to yield limited magnetic
field threading compared with a traditional laminated core. We are
also examining the possibility of printed wiring configurations based
on disk-based motor designs. This is an attempt to minimize
assembly; each core module currently involves winding of the
previously extruded insulated wire around a plastic bobbin, which
must be then sheathed over the core. This must be followed by the
assembly of each wire-wound core unit into the final central rotor
within the surrounding stator configuration. There are many practical
considerations that make 3-D printing motors quite the challenge. We
expect this to be a lengthy process; nevertheless, we see no
fundamental hindrances. A carousel or belt-mounted EBF3–FDM
system may manufacture the multiple interleaved metal/plastic
layers, thereby demonstrating multimaterial 3-D printing. Once a
wire-wound core can be constructed, it opens up the possibility of
3-D printing universal motor designs based entirely on electromagnetics. The universal motor is favored over the use of permanent
magnets for versatility and modularity of the motor design.
Furthermore, lunar potassium-rare earth element-phosphorus
(KREEP) soils are only slightly enhanced over baseline terrestrial

320

ELLERY

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

Fig. 5

Photographs of a) wire-wound laminated motor core, and b) in dc motor configuration.

excavation in mining. Without motors, none of these functions can be
achieved.

V.

Fig. 6

SLS-printed steel layers for a motor core.

concentrations of Nd (460 ppm) and Sm (127 ppm) required for
NdSm permanent magnets, making high-performance magnets
unrealistic from lunar material. In the universal motor, coils are used
to energize both the rotor and the stator poles; both sets of cores are
constructed from plastic laminated layers of silicon electrical steel.

IV.

Universal Robots

The electric motor provides the basis for a 3-DOF wrist assembly
that could replace the printing head of a 3-D printer. This would
enable a 3-D printer such as RepRap to be adapted to perform 6-DOF
assembly operations of parts within its workspace. Avariation on this
theme might be a Stewart platform for precision manipulation.
Compliant operation can be achieved with the remote center
compliance mechanism for peg-in-hole tasks that is commonly used
for assembly tasks. Assembly operations may be supported by
printed jigs to hold components in place for assembly; this is part of
the “controlled” environment alluded to earlier. A specific complex
assembly sequence must be followed for the construction of the 3-D
printed electric motor; this currently represents a complex set of
assembly tasks, but in principle, assembly is a variation of a 3-D
printing head.
Motors are essential for the construction of additional
manufacturing tools such as lathes, milling stations, drill presses,
bending presses, extruders, and any other motorized tool necessary
for a fabrication laboratory. From a 3-D printable electric motor,
lathes, milling machines, drill presses, brake presses, and other
machines may be constructed because these machines are simply
kinematic configurations of motors. There is little doubt that 3-D
printers themselves, versatile as they are, do not eliminate the need for
further machine tools, though they do minimize their use. The
extrusion of metal wire will be a critical capability for the motor coils
(if they cannot be printed); an extruder is essentially a motor-driven
press. Indeed, plastic extruders are already part of the printing head of
FDM-type printers. Furthermore, motors provide the basis for pumps
and stirrers for driving throughput in unit chemical processes,
beneficiation with jaw crushers, postprocessing through ball milling
and shot peening, mobility for surveying, and drilling/trenching/

Printable Electronics

Modern digital electronics manufacture requires a foundry costing
around ∼10 billion, which employs around 30 different complex
physical and chemical processes (such as vapor deposition,
molecular beam epitaxy, etc.) to create solid-state transistors and
other solid-state devices. They require extensive reagent inventories
for such processing. Even solar cell-grade silicon requires significant
processing [32]. Such solid-state electronics foundries would be
prohibitively expensive and totally infeasible as part of a selfreplicating system. This restriction denies us present-day computer
technology, software, and high-efficiency solar cells within our selfreplication scheme. Although there has been much progress in
developing printed plastic electronics, there are significant hurdles
such as stability, especially with organic thin film transistors, and
they are generally proposed for limited applications such as radiofrequency identification tags due to their modest performance
[33,34]. Furthermore, manufacture of the active organic materials
(such as pentacene) and solutions (such as chloroflorm) using lunar
materials would be highly complex and difficult effectively ruling
this out from consideration here. We have focused on the use of
resistor-capacitor-inductor (RCL) circuits that involve simple,
potentially printable components (though we have yet to demonstrate
such 3-D printed circuitry); resistors are conducting wires of various
cross sections, capacitors are conducting parallel plates between a
dielectric, and inductors are coils of conducting wire of relatively
simple construction. From resistor-capacitor filters and inductorcapacitor oscillators, a large range of electronic circuits can be
constructed including filters for signal processing.
For computing systems, we considered mechanical systems (such
as the Globus indicator of position navigation instrument in service
on Soyuz spacecraft until 2002), electromagnetic relays (such as
Turing’s “bombes” at Bletchley Park that cracked the Enigma code),
and vacuum tubes (first programmable electronic computer,
Colossus at Bletchley Park comprised of 2400 vacuum tubes).
Traveling-wave tube amplifiers (TWTAs) are vacuum tube amplifiers
with radio-frequency amplification of ∼70 dB that are still used in
high-power communications satellites. The klystron and cavity
magnetron are also microwave amplifier vacuum tube derivatives that
may be used in high-power radiofrequency applications. Vacuum
tubes are thermionic diodes that use a resistance wire to heat a cathode
to 800–1200°C in an evacuated glass or ceramic envelope (which
may not be necessary in a vacuum but is desirable to mitigate against
dust contamination). The cathode comprises a Ni coat within which is
a sintered tungsten filament with a high melting point. Tungsten’s
very high melting point at 3422°C (the highest of all metals) means
that it must be sintered rather than melted during manufacture. It may
be coated with alkaline earth oxide such as CaO to reduce its work
function to operate at lower temperature (∼600°C), but this is not
essential and would impose a requirement for the extraction of Ca
from lunar material, an unnecessary complication. Vacuum tubes

321

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

ELLERY

offer superior performance to solid-state electronics in being less
susceptible to radiation. Furthermore, if vacuum tubes are maintained
in the power-on state in a thermally stable environment (such as
buried in lunar regolith), they are highly reliable; a British Broadcasting Corporation pentode transmitter operated for 232,592 h from
1935 to 1961. The first differential amplifier was based on a pair of
vacuum tubes, and subsequently operational amplifiers were based
on vacuum tubes through 1941–1961. The greater instability of
vacuum tubes over solid-state devices may be offset through the use
of instrumentation amplifier configurations. Furthermore, it is
plausible (though yet to be demonstrated) that vacuum tubes’ simple
construction offers opportunities for miniaturization.
Op-amps as active devices are highly versatile in providing
sophisticated capabilities in relatively simple circuitry. Electric motor
systems include a motor controller board that incorporates H-bridge
and proportional-integral-differential (PID) controller circuits that
can be constructed from op-amp circuits and feedback sensors. A
simple PID analog controller circuit for a motor would represent a
simple implementation of op-amp circuits. Op-amps can be
employed for bandwidth filters, PID controllers, differential equation
modeling, electronic mixers, Braitenburg control [35] architectures
for robot behavior control, shifter circuits for optic flow hardware
(Reichardt detectors [36]), Hasslacher and Tilden’s nervous nets [37],
Reynolds’s boids-type swarm control [38], Buffon’s needle
algorithm (useful for surveying) [39], etc. Hence, simple op-amp
circuits can implement highly sophisticated functions without the use
of general-purpose computers.

VI.

Printable Computers

Beyond the control circuitry that is readily implementable in
traditional analog electronics, computing architectures with stored
memory are required. Rather than opting for traditional generalpupose computer architectures, we have adopted simple electronic
neurons as universal computing elements. A McCulloch–Pitts
version of such electronic neurons can implement logic gates,
exhibiting its potential for both digital and analog circuitry. Although
the artificial neural network has been used for nonlinear mapping of
input–output data sets for pattern recognition (by a generalization of
the Stone–Weierstrass theorem), it is far more powerful than that. The
universal Turing machine has been shown to be implementable on
recurrent neural nets of sigmoid neurons [40]. Neural networks can
implement logic programs such as expert systems or any type of
symbolic artificial intelligence [41]. They offer significantly reduced
physical footoprint over general-pupose architectures by virtue of the
high information compression in their hidden nodes [42]. The neural
network represents a powerful computational medium for robotics; it
can map complex control decisions that would be difficult through

Fig. 7

traditional means. Indeed, the backpropagation algorithm can
implement a Bayesian classifier [43] and a degenerate form of the
extended Kalman filter [44]. The robotics functions will be critical in
providing the adaptability in dealing with complex environments
during surveying and mining phases of the self-replication process.
Three rover-specific applications illustrating the versatility of neural
nets are 1) feedback control systems [45] for manipulators [46], their
supplementation with feedforward models [47], and their application
to predictive active vision [48]; 2) complex signal processing through
Gabor-based processing of visual textures for biomimetic vision
[49]; and 3) autonomous navigation of rovers through RatSLAM
(from “self-localization and mapping”) [50] and neural field path
planning [51].
Neural networks of reconfigurable neurons can exploit the
hardware-on-demand capability of 3-D printing. In this case, the 3-D
printer becomes part of the general computer architecture similar to
the original Turing machine concept [52]. In our case, the input tape is
represented by a magnetic core memory (broadly similar in construction to a motor core) for storing software programs. The 3-D printer
constitutes the read/write head. The output is the specific neural
circuit that realizes the selected input program, in this case, a
configuration of printed electronic neurons. Rather than building a
complex general-pupose computing architecture, the entire assembly
constitutes the general-pupose computing architecture, but the output
circuits have a relatively small physical footprint.
The electronic neuron models the nonlinear input–output relation
with the output yi given by
yi  f

X
n


wij xi

(1)

j0

where xi is the input, wij is the weighting factor, and f· is the
nonlinear squashing function.
A suitable analog neuron (the Yamashida–Nakaruma neuron),
comprising a summing integrator, sigmoid output, and a comparator,
has been described that is constructable from simple op-amp-based
circuits [53]. We modified the design by replacing the sigmoid with
a signum function for more stable response. We implemented a
two-neuron circuit on a desktop mobile robot platform (Fig. 7). It
successfully performed obstacle avoidance tasks in following routes
(reactively) through multiple obstacle configurations. This demonstrates the viability of the hardware analog neural network approach
in a robotic task.
There is no requirement for online learning in this concept, though
inevitably, because of limitations in printed circuit fidelity, tuning
may be required.

Circuit representations of a simple hardware two-neuron neural controller.

322

ELLERY

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

VII.

Printable Sensors

To create a full motor system, we need sensors. There are three
fundamental types of sensor, all of which are required in a motor
control system: displacement, force/pressure, and light detection.
Displacement is the most fundamental of sensing modalities from
which most other mechanical properties are derived. Displacement
may be measured through rotary potentiometers (variable resistors)
or optical encoders. Displacement and force/pressure may be
measured using piezoelectric quartz; unfortunately, quartz does not
occur naturally on the moon but may be grown from silica. Silica is
melted at 2000°C and subjected to hydrothermal synthesis below
573°C followed by seeding in sodium silicate at 350°C and 150 bar.
Sodium silicate is a catalyst; Na must be imported from Earth. This is
the counterpart to the salt contingency discussed later. If desired,
vapor phase pyrolysis may be employed to decompose SiO2 to Si in a
vacuum at 1250°C without the need for catalysts imported from
Earth [54].
For optical sensitivity for image sensing and/or Reichardt
detectors, rather than using pn junction materials, which require
precisely doped silicon, we have chosen the simplest light-sensitive
material: p-type semiconductor selenium that was used in the
Victorian photophone. Indeed, the first semiconductor junction solar
cells were constructed from selenium and gold film, offering 1%
efficiency. Photocathodes and photomultipliers coated with Se offer
light sensitivity. Both types of devices are derived from vacuum
tubes. Other simple photocathode materials include K and Na alkali
metals, which are sensitive to visible photons, but these would be
complex to extract from KREEP soils. We have yet to identify a
suitable potential ultraviolet-sensitive material that would be useful
in detecting ilmenite that exhibits characteristic spectral responses in
this waveband (see later) [55].
We have developed a novel rover-based surveying technique to
measure physical soil properties that are important in geotechnics
(cohesion and friction) without using complex spectrometers. We use
simple load sensors above each wheel of the rover to “feel” the terrain
over which the rover traverses. Changes in cohesion and friction
caused by icy soil for instance can be readily detected. Such sensors
were implemented on our Kapvik microrover and field-tested to
demonstrate the proof of principle. Rover trials were conducted at
Petrie Island near Ottawa, a well-known sandy “beach” of reasonably
consolidated sand. A multilayer perceptron neural network was
trained on sample load-cohesion/friction angle input–output pairs
created from a Bekker–Wong terramechanics model. Once trained,
this was used to extract soil cohesion and friction angle from the
empirical load cell data. As expected, the data gave consistent results
of 3.7 kPa cohesion and 28 deg friction angle over the traverse
indicative of sandy loam as expected [56]. This technique may be
readily applied to detect surface water ice and fluffy soil, indicating
evaporated ice in the search for lunar volatiles. This demonstrates that
simple sensors in conjunction with neural nets can provide a powerful
signal analysis tool for basic surveying in support of surface mining
of regolith. More sophisticated instruments for identifying elements
may be feasible with neural network signal processing such as
microwave-induced breakdown spectroscopy [57]. X-ray reflectance
spectroscopy may also be feasible for mineralogy; x-ray tubes are
vacuum tubes that generate x rays that evolved from the Crookes
tube. The anode in this case is also tungsten like the cathode. The
150 kV electrons from the hot cathode strike the anode releasing
x rays through Bremsstrahlung effects.

VIII.

Chemical Processing of Raw Materials

ISRU is based on the concept of reducing reliance on transported
cargo to support space missions; it is typically regarded as an adjunct
to support human missions rather than as an enabling critical technology. It was the linchpin in Mars Direct concept [58]. The most
basic lunar resource is regolith, and it is the scooping of surface
regolith by the rover that provides the raw materials for ISRU presented here; no trenching or underground mining is necessary (except
in the case presented later for drilling). Note that beneficiation of

regolith is not implemented on the RPM demonstrator, which will
process unsorted soil samples.
Material processing requires a foundry: in its simplest form, a
heated crucible [59]. A lunar version would be a solar-furnace-based
foundry based either on printed parabolic mirror segments or on cast
Fresnel lens concentrators to create temperatures of 1600 and 2700°C
respectively, more than required for metal extraction. The reflectivity
of polished nickel reflectors is 90%, whereas that of polished steel is
75%. The chief challenge will be accurate mirror grinding and the
alignment of the mirrors (which may be calibrated using a Stewart
platform). The Fresnel lens is much favored in terms of performance,
but precision casting is essential. A tungsten rather than ceramic
crucible would be required for the higher temperatures.
A smelting-casting system with 3-D printing demonstrates the
principle of bootstrapping machine shop facilities and tooling from
raw materials. The solar concentrators enable layered sintering of
regolith into ceramic structures built layer by layer; this will be
essential for ceramic casting [60]. Lunar glass is abundant in lunar
regolith, but its properties are variable, and so the production of lunar
glass on demand involves heating basalt in a furnace until it melts as
fused silicate/oxide at 1300°C. Glass from the melt requires high
cooling rates (∼20 °C∕s) to prevent its crystallization. Lunar glass
will comprise 40–45% SiO2 , 15–25% Al2 O3 , 5–15% FeO, 11–15%
CaO, 0.5–8% TiO, and smaller amounts of other metal oxides. It is
expected that lunar glass manufactured under vacuum conditions will
offer superior mechanical properties to terrestrial glass due to the
paucity of water vapor. Glass may be used as electrical and thermal
insulation material especially as glass wool.
ISRU has concentrated on the extraction of consumables (oxygen,
hydrogen, and water) because these are viewed as the major logistics
commodities in human spaceflight. Indeed, RPM will acquire lunar
regolith to extract water ice and to demonstrate oxygen production by
hydrogen reduction of ilmenite at 900°C:
FeTiO3  H2 → Fe  TiO2  H2 O 2H2 O → H2  O2
Hydrogen is recycled. Although oxygen is generally the desired
component from the reduction of ilmenite, iron is the main resource
material that underlies the entire infrastructure required to support
self-replication: an iron-based extraterrestrial industry. Ti is too
difficult to extract from titania, but titania may be extruded as fibers
for thermal and/or electrical insulation. Iron is an extremely versatile
material; before the advent of aluminium in the 1950s, iron had beem
the primary structural metal since 1200 B.C.E. Its range of alloys with
tailorable properties is vast, but even just a small number of alloys can
serve a wide range of functions. Wrought (pure) iron is tough but
malleable, suitable for tensile structures. Steel includes low amounts
of less than 2% C, which hardens it considerably. The addition of
9–18% tungsten creates tool steel for cutting tools that are resistant to
wear. Cast iron with ∼2–4 C and 1–2% is more brittle, but it is still
suitable as a structural material; the Iron Bridge at Coalbrookdale has
withstood the English climate since 1781. Silicon electrical steel
comprises up to 3% Si and 97% Fe for high electrical resistivity for
use in motors to reduce eddy currents and minimize core losses.
Fernico is a family of alloys of Fe, Ni, and Co; of particular note is
Kovar, a high electrically and thermally conductive iron alloy (53%
Fe, 29% Ni, and 17% Co with minor constituents 0.3% Mn, 0.2% Si,
and less than 0.01% C) that provides electrical conducting wires
(such as motor coils) and high thermal conduction paths for
conducting heat away from hot spots (such as motors). The good
electrical properties are imparted by the Ni. This eliminates the
requirement for electrolytic extraction of aluminium and/or calcium
from anorthite for electrical or structural applications; see later for
extraction of Ni, Co, and W.
RPM will demonstrate the extraction of volatile from the lunar
regolith, particularly water ice, implanted by solar wind. Solar wind
has impregnated regolith with 96% hydrogen (∼120 ppm), almost
4% He, and trace amounts of H2 O, CO, CO2 , CH4 , N2 , NH3 , H2 S,
SO2 , and noble gas Ar. Apart from water, hydrogen, and oxygen,
carbon compounds will be of high value due to their scarcity.
Volatiles will comprise an important part of any resource utilization

323

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

ELLERY

infrastructure [61]. The gases are preferentially absorbed onto small
particles of ilmenite favoring beneficiation of ilmenite specifically.
Selection of smaller particles with the highest concentrations of
volatiles favors sieving, but this would be wasteful of ilmenite. To
enhance extraction of purer ilmenite fractions and reduce energy
consumption, beneficiation may be implemented through physical
crushing [62] or more speculatively through microwave heating.
Differences in the magnetic susceptibilities of anorthite, pyroxene,
and ilmenite allow the separation of ferromagnetic ilmenite magnetically [63]. Heating the regolith to 700°C would release 90% of the
adsorbed volatiles. These can be separated out through fractional
distillation: He at 4.2 K, H2 at 20 K, N2 at 77 K, CO at 81 K, CH4 at
109 K, CO2 at 194 K, and H2 O at 373 K.
Plastic is a highly useful material, too valuable to waste on
structural applications. Given the severe limitation in carbon
resources on the moon, we restrict plastic purely for flexible wire
insulation applications, laminations of electrical steel in motor cores,
and bobbins. Motor coils may be insulated or embedded in the bobbin
to ensure that short circuits do not occur. Bobbins for wire coils in
motors may constructed from cast basalt [64,65] or other ceramics,
but its brittleness presents concerns for high-speed rotating machinery. Furthermore, we have selected silicone plastics as manufacturable from lunar resources to minimize carbon use. Silicones are
synthetic polymerized organic-silicon compounds (siloxanes) with
repeating R2 SiO units, where R is an organic group (typically methyl
or ethyl group) linked by Si-O-Si backbones. This also opens the
possibility of using plastic binder in mixing combinations of regolith
or metal particles with a plastic binder, but this would be wasteful of a
scarce resource that may readily substituted by other structural
material. Methane and water vapor, both of which may be extracted
from lunar volatiles, may be reacted to form syngas at 850°C and
4 MPa with a recyclable Ni catalyst:
CH4  H2 O → CO  3H2
Methanol is produced from CO and H2 (syngas) reacted over an
alumina (Al2 O3 ) catalyst at 250°C and 5–10 MPa:
CO  H2 → CH3 OH
Chloromethane is manufactured by reacting the alcohol (methanol
in this case) with HCl over an alumina catalyst at 350°C:
CH3 OH  HCl → CH3 Cl  H2 O
CH3 Cl is reacted with Si at 370°C in the presence of a Cu catalyst
to form dialkyl dichlorosilanes (R2 SiCl2 ):
2CH3 Cl  Si → CH3 2 SiCl2
This is then hydrolyzed:
nCH3 2 SiCl2  nH2 O → CH3 2 SiOn  2nHCl
This yields the most common siloxane, polydimethylsiloxane, a
silicone oil, but other silicone plastics are manufactured in a similar
manner. Silicone oil may be employed in motor lubrication as well as
hot isostatic pressing of metal powders (in power metallurgy).
Silicones are highly versatile plastics; they are radiation tolerant and
tolerant to high temperatures up to 350°C (even 500°C for short
periods). Silicone elastomers offer superior performance as dielectrics in capacitors for their high dielectric constant with low
elastic moduli. RepRap can, in fact, print in silicone plastics. The HCl
is recycled. The apparent limitation of requiring Cl (in the form of
HCl as a recyclable reagent) that requires importation from Earth can
be exploited to advantage: a “salt contingency” that supplies NaCl as
recycled reagents. Sodium is more abundant in lunar highland than
the mare but is highly depleted by an order of magnitude in
comparison to Earth. It appears in bytownite, a minor plagioclase
mineral on the moon. Chlorine is depleted almost as much where
apatite (calcium phosphate with halogen constituents) is a trace

mineral. Hence, the salt contingency imposes a powerful means of
control over the self-replication process to eliminate the possibility of
uncontrolled replication.
An essential requirement for the self-replicator will be electrical
energy. Amorphous silicon extracted from the regolith silicates for
photovoltaic power generation is limited to ∼1–5% efficiencies
unless dopants are used to create pn junction cells. Although it is
possible using microwave methods to create p-type silicon using Al
dopant [66], it is unlikely to be consistently repeatable and requires
the extraction of Al, which is not in the current inventory. For ISRU,
we require dominantly thermal energy for heating, sintering
ceramics, casting basalt, smelting minerals, etc., using solar concentrators. The foundry provides the key to electrical power generation
implementing a solar furnace without using solar cells. Radioisotopethermoelectric-generator-based power conversion involves banks of
high-temperature-tolerant SiGe thermoelectric converters, but Ge is
rare on the moon. Mg2 Si is a potential thermoelectric converter based
on lunar materials, but thermoelectric conversion is less efficient as
well as imposing significant chemical processing requirements.
Dynamic power conversion as used in nucear reactors requires highthermal-capacity liquids such as Na(K) (e.g., alkali metal thermal-toelectric converters), high-pressure water (e.g., pressurized water
reactor), or gas cooling with He (e.g., advanced gas-cooled reactor).
None of these are viable. However, thermionic emission is often used
in high-temperature applications such as space-based nuclear
reactors to pick off electrical power with 5–20% conversion efficiencies [67] (∼10% should be achievable with even a fairly primitive
arrangement); it is based on vacuum tube technology, thus offering
multiple use of the same product technology. Similarly, for energy
storage, motorized flywheels are ideal over long periods during the
two-week lunar night. Hence, vacuum tubes and motors are the
critical components in both energy generation and energy storage.

IX.

Mining of Exotic Materials

Certain materials such as Ni, Co, etc., are scarce on the moon and
require access to asteroidal material; the moon has been bombarded
for aeons as indicated by its cratering record. Mass concentrations
(mascons) on the moon at impact craters induce changes in the local
gravity field, indicating massive asteroid impact [68]. They are
detectable from their gravity field pattern due to a central gravity
excess (due to increased density) surrounded by an inner ring of
gravity deficit and another outer ring of gravity excess. Remnants of
some of these asteroid strikes are also indicated by magnetic
anomalies caused by iron-rich magnetic rock. Metal (NiFe)
meteorites constitute around 6% of falls originating from M-type
asteroids. Iron asteroids constitute an Ni source from the NiFe alloy.
Much of the lunar magnetic anomalies are located around the rim of
the South Pole–Aitken basin crater. In any case, there is evidence that
there are iron-rich deposits on the moon that originated from asteroid
impacts. Ni is a hard ferromagnetic metal primarily found as NiFe
alloy (kamacite and taenite) in NiFe meteoritic material as found
in the Sudbury astrobleme in Canada. Kamacite is an FeNi (90∶10 to
95∶5) alloy often with Co contaminant. Kamacite is found
intermixed with taenite in NiFe meteorites; taenite is an FeNi
(35-80∶65-20) alloy. The Mond process may be employed for
purifying Ni by reacting with CO at 40–80°C with an S catalyst to
form nickel carbonyl. This may be reversed to yield Ni powder at
230°C and 60 bar with the CO recycled: NiCO4 ↔ Ni  4CO.
Inclusions of troilite are also common as the source of the S catalyst.
The Mond process allows separation of Ni from Fe and Co
contaminant [69,70]. Cobalt is commonly found in astroblemes on
Earth such as the Sudbury crater. Cobalt is a ferromagnetic metal with
a high melting point of 1495°C found in natural alloys with iron in
NiFi meteoritic material. Both Co and Ni may be extracted
magnetically and are used in steel production, in superalloys, and as
powdered catalysts in the Fischer–Tropsch process to hydrogenate
CO into hydrocarbons. NiFe asteroids are also expected to possess
significant amounts of siderophile elements such as Pt (useful as a
potential catalyst as well as a precious metal) and rare earth metals.
The extraction of pure Ni from the Mond process, a separate source of

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

324

ELLERY

Fe from ilmenite, and FeCo alloy offers the opportunity to tailor a
range of fernico alloys using simple density measures.
Lunar rock and regolith contain variable amounts of tungsten; Nb,
Ta, and W are trace elements less than 1%. High Ta concentrations
occur in lunar granites and telsites, and high Nb concentrations occur
in ilmenite (2%) in lunar granite [71]. Highland rock is more enriched
in tungsten than lunar basalt at an average of 0.3 μg∕g. Tungsten may
be recovered from wolframite Fe; MnWO4 , scheelite CaWO4 ,
ferberite FeWO4 , and hubnerite MnWO4 . The ore is converted to
oxide WO3 , which is heated and reduced with hydrogen to produce
powdered tungsten [72]: WO3  3H2 → W  3H2 O. Hydrogen can
be recycled and oxygen recovered. The low incidence of tungsten
makes this approach unattractive. However, NiFe asteroids are often
enriched in tungsten microparticle inclusions. Tungsten’s very high
density of 19.3 times that of water, close to uranium and gold,
presents a means for its separation from other elements as Fe, Ni,
and Co.
Selenide (such as Cu2 Se, PbSe, ZnSe, etc.) and selenite (such as
Na2 SeO3 ) minerals are rare, and so Se is mostly commonly found in
impure form associated with metal sulphide ores, where it partly
replaces sulphur. Sulphides of copper, zinc, selenium, etc., are
hydrous minerals and so are absent from lunar rock. Lunar regolith,
however, is enriched in chalcopyrite (copper iron sulphide) deposits
compared with lunar rock due to the existence of volatile compounds
resulting from bolide impacts permeating the regolith. Sulphur has a
relatively high abundance in lunar soils averaging 700 ppm by mass.
Troilite (FeS) is a minor component ∼1% of mare basalt and is
typically associated with ilmenite, though it cannot be separated
magnetically. Sulphides including FeS are enriched in impact craters,
indicating that there are enriched sulphur sources in asteroids. The
Se/S ratio tends to be fairly constant in chondrites. Selenium
microinclusions in NiFe meteorites makes them the primary ore for
Se. Se is manufactured as a byproduct of mining nickel or copper
from copper sulphides on Earth. Electrolytic refining of metal
sulphide yields Se at the anode. This makes asteroidal material highly
desirable as a source of selenium.
It cannot be guaranteed that these materials will occur in adequate
form in surface regolith in the locale of mascons. Accessing these
resources may be altogether more challenging than surface strip
mining of regolith. Fortunately, these materials will be required in
only relatively modest amounts. Nevertheless, drilling methods will
be required, and perhaps there is scope for some novel approaches
[73]. I would anticipate that subsurface asteroid mining may be
centrally administered with telesupervisory control as a service to the
self-replicating machines, thereby providing a safeguard against
uncontrolled replication.

X.

Spacecraft Manufacture from Lunar Resources

We have outlined a case that indicates that a complete mechatronic
system could be manufactured from lunar resources using 3-D
printing technology. If so, it is a short step to show that we have
instituted what amounts to a universal constructor (and selfreplicator). All the component technologies required for the construction of a spacecraft are present. To be sure, the spacecraft subsystems
may be primitive, but parallel manufacture from a vast population of
self-replicating factories opens possibilities hitherto regarded as
impossible. Once we have manufactured the desired population of
self-replicating factories, they may be programmed to manufacture
spacecraft en masse.
Electromagnetic launchers may be constructed to launch spacecraft
units into lunar orbit. The mass driver comprises a magnetically
levitated vehicle accelerated by a linear synchronous electric motor. A
coil-based electromagnetic mass driver constitutes the same basic
components as an electric motor but in a linear configuration (of larger
scale, of course) [74]. The cylindrical armature carries an armature
current and resides within a long solenoid (stator) comprising separate
coils. The armature is suspended by magnetic induction from the
energized coils to eliminate friction. The coils are energized sequentially like a stepper motor so that the armature accelerates along the
solenoid axis. Spacecraft-containing buckets are accelerated to launch

speeds. From the moon, an electromagnetic launcher must launch into
Lagrangian point 1 (L1) transfer orbit at 3 km∕s, easily within reach of
modest electromagnetic launchers compared with 12 km∕s required
from Earth. On the moon, a 10 km track can provide 30g continuous
acceleration using 2 Telectromagnets (within the capacity of soft iron).
Large amounts of electrical energy must be stored for release during
launches; flywheels are ideal for high power densities and the ability to
supply high power over short release times.
A spacecraft onboard propulsion system requires fuel oxidizer or a
nonfuel form of propulsion. Compressed propellant H2 and oxidizer
O2 may be manufactured from lunar volatiles and subjected to
passive cooling. Tankage and thrusters of iron and steel, respectively,
may be lined with tungsten. Solar sails would be highly desirable for
some applications. For a perfectly reflecting solar sail, the performance is determined by the lightness parameter [75]:
β

1.53
σ

(2)

where σ is the sail mass/unit area (in grams per square meter). Sail
acceleration has a lower useful bound of greater than 0.1 mm∕s2 at 1
astronomical unit given by
ac 

β
9.11

mm∕s2
0.168
ρt

(3)

Hence, for iron with a density of ρ  7.87 × 106 g∕m3 , the
minimum thickness is given by
t

9.11
< 12 μm
ac ρ

(4)

This is a best case scenario; more useful accelerations require
thinner sails. It is not currently clear whether solar sails can be
manufactured to such tolerances on the moon, and so chemical
propulsion will likely be the propulsion system of choice, at least for a
first-generation infrastructure.
Wrought iron (and steel where necessary) may be used for the
primary and secondary structures. 3-D printing offers greater
flexibility in structural design such as isogrid and truss designs.
Motorized mechanisms for deployables may employ the electric
motors as described. Attitude control may employ reaction wheels,
momentum wheels, or control moment gyroscopes driven by the
electric motors as described. Thermal control may be based on
passive systems such as thermally conductive thermal straps and
glass thermal insulation or active methods that rely on resistance
heaters and electric motors such as louvres, etc.
Data handling may be implemented through the vacuum-tubebased logic circuits and neural network controllers [76]. The
communications subsystem is similar in concept to the data handling
subsystem (Fig. 8). Quartz is ideal as a radiofrequency oscillator; the
Pierce oscillator may be constructed with a minimum number of
components: one inverter, two resistors, two capacitors, and one
quartz crystal. The mixer is a transistor/diode circuit, the filter is an
RCL circuit, the amplifier is a TWTA, and the demodulator is a diode.
Convolutional codes for channel coding may be implemented using
Ex-OR gates, whereas Viterbi decoding may be implemented

Fig. 8 Communications system hardware chain (RF, radiofrequency;
IF, intermediate frequency).

325

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

ELLERY

neurally [77]. Hence, a simple communications system may be
implemented using vacuum tube technology.
Power generation in space may derive from the lunar approach
outlined previously; solar concentrators concentrate light to high
heat, which is converted to electrical energy through thermionic
emission with a conversion efficiency of ∼10%. There is thus no
requirement for photovoltaic cells. For short-duration eclipsing,
rechargeable NiFe batteries using a KOH electrolyte (extracted from
KREEP basalts) are a robust form of energy storage, though with low
specific energy of 25 W · h∕kg; they were used to power the German
V2 rockets. Long-duration power storage may use flywheels
if necessary, possibly combining power storage with attitude
control [78].
Optical sensors using arrays of selenium pixels may be employed
as a generalized camera payload (and/or sun/star cameras).
All the major spacecraft subsystems can be manufactured from
lunar resources. To be sure, the spacecraft concept presented will be
simple in nature and certainly suboptimal. Given that they will be
designed and constructed according to very different constraints from
current spacecraft under very different conditions, it is likely that
spacecraft design will develop in unforeseen ways. In particular, large
constellations will become feasible.

XI.

Space-Based Solutions to Global Problems

In 2013, CO2 levels in the atmosphere passed 400 ppm compared
to 280 ppm preindustrial levels for the first time in human history, and
there are no signs of abatement (Fig. 9); it is projected to reach
450 ppm around 2020 generating a 2°C rise in average temperature
globally.
In reality, little is being achieved to solve the problem for many
political, economic, and technical reasons. Indeed, over the last few
years, the tone of speech has resignedly shifted from combatting
climate change to enduring and accommodating its worst excesses.
There is a solution to this human-generated geophysiological disease.
The treatment involves treatment of symptoms (painkiller) and
treatment of aetiology (antibiotic). For our geophysiological ailment
of atmospheric carbon excess, the painkiller involves climate
intervention, whereas the antibiotic involves clean energy generation,
both from space.
Geoengineering approaches to climate change mitigation are
unpopular and regarded with suspicion. It involves intervention in the
climate to reduce global temperatures; it includes sulphate aerosol
injection into the stratosphere and the seeding of oceans with Fe
particles to create algal blooms (like El Niño). These methods are not
reversible, though they dissipate over time; for this reason, they
require annual application. Until now, space-based approaches have
been regarded as unworkable and enormously costly. Space-based
geoengineering involves the construction of a solar shield at L1 with
an equivalent radius of 1824 km to reduce incident radiation by 1.6%
corresponding to a temperature drop of 1.75°C [79]. Alternatively, it

Fig. 9 Mean CO2 levels in the Earth’s atmosphere (credit National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration).

has been proposed to deliver 1012 60-cm-diam discs to L1 by 20
railguns on Earth launching 106 silicon disks every 5 min for 10 years
[80]. Both approaches are impractical. Self-replication technology
offers the potential for constructing large numbers of small solar
shield units from lunar resources at low cost. Each unit is a small,
fully controllable 3-D printed spacecraft using solar petals supplemented by propellant to maintain their mean location at sun–Earth
L1. These solar shield units may implement swarm control behaviors
such as neural fields, potential fields, or equilibrium control
approaches mediated by neural network controllers [81]. These
approaches are modest in cost, fully controllable, modulatable,
and reversible, unlike most geoengineering solutions. This is the
painkiller.
The same approach may be adopted to generate clean energy for
Earth. Thus, the argument that geoengineering will discourage
weening from fossil fuels is a nonsequitur in this case. Solar power
satellites can beam microwave energy to rectenna arrays on Earth
[82], the principle of which has been demonstrated. The solar power
satellite is a spacecraft with a microwave payload. It is envisaged as a
giant structure that uses large photovoltaic arrays to generate electric
power, which is then fed into a klystron vacuum tube (i.e., light to
electric to heat to electric/microwave energy thence transmitted
through a waveguide to Earth). However, it is possible to exploit
thermionic emission directly by using solar concentrators to
concentrate light to heat the klystron cathode directly to generate
microwave radiation for transmission to Earth, bypassing the
intermediate electrical energy conversion step. Electrical energy for
onboard services can be generated the same way by thermionic
conversion to electrical energy independently. This should be of
comparable efficiency as photovoltaic conversion, but it is based on
pure vacuum tube technology constructed on the moon using a
restricted materials inventory. A solar power satellite system could be
constructed as a swarm of small units created via self-replication
technology. This is the antibiotic.
Such a productive capacity on the moon enabled by selfreplicating machines may be exploited by the private sector in ways
currently unimagined as the space sector opens to private ingenuity.
Much of human exploration on Earth has been driven by such
motives. The private space sector has already been demonstrating its
vigor in driving progress in space exploration, and I suspect that it
would not leave fallow opportunities for the exploitation of
extraterrestrial assets. The first step will be the RPM mission.

XII.

Conclusions

The core capabilities necessary for this self-replication proof of
concept have been outlined. Although there are many problems with
which to contend, there appear to be no fundamental hurdles. The
present focus initially is on a 3-D printable motor system, which is
currently in progress.
The devil, of course, is in the details; there are no illusions of the
magnitude of the task in achieving full self-replicaton. The later steps
toward full self-replication will be just as challenging; they will focus
on organization, control, throughput, and logistics rather than the
individual components as discussed thus far. Self-replication offers
immense potential for the space sector. In the short term, selfreplication can address immediate climate mitigation issues. In the
long term, self-replication offers the prospect for migrating the entire
energy generation industry off Earth, relieving the Earth’s biosphere
from the damaging effects of such industries. Space exploration may
yet be the key to solving the most pressing global problems.
Application of the techniques for self-replication on the moon to
near-Earth asteroids (NEAs) will introduce additional challenges
imposed by the microgravity conditions. Nevertheless, the foundations will be laid on the moon. The exploitation of asteroids (and
comets in the form of spent comet nuclei) will vastly increase the
range of materials available, relaxing some of the constraints imposed
by lunar resources. This will introduce a maturity to space infrastructure development. Deimos and Phobos are carbonaceous chondrite
asteroids in orbit around Mars. With NEAs and the moon, they
provide final stepping stones to the surface of Mars. In conjunction

326

ELLERY

with self-replication technology for exploiting in situ resources,
human Mars exploration becomes a more practical and, more
importantly, sustainable goal. Indeed, Mars, rather than being an end
goal, would represent the major leap in opening the whole of the solar
system to human exploration. But this can only be achieved in a
sustainable manner through the leverage provided by self-replication
technology.

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the National Science and
Engineering Research Council of Canada. I would like to thank Mark
Kirby and his team at Renishaw Mississauga for their assistance with
selective laser sintering. I would also like to thank my students, Brian
Lynch, Tim Setterfield, Cory Frazer, Zaid Kharoufeh, and Samantha
Larson, for their assistance and images on this study.

References
[1] Burkes, A., Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, Univ. of Illinois
Press, Champaign, IL, 1966.
[2] Watson, J., and Crick, F., “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A
Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid,” Nature, Vol. 171, No. 4356,
1953, pp. 737–738.
doi:10.1038/171737a0
[3] Freitas, R., and Merkle, R., Kinematic Self-Replicating Machines,
Landes Bioscience, Austin, TX, 2004.
[4] Wolfram, S., A New Kind of Science, Wolfram Media, Champaign, IL,
2002.
[5] Langton, C., Artificial Life: An Overview, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
1998.
[6] Zykov, V., Mytilinaios, E., Adams, B., and Lipson, H., “Self-Reproducing
Machines,” Nature, Vol. 435, No. 7039, 2005, pp. 163–164.
doi:10.1038/435163a
[7] Freitas, R., and Gilbreath, W., Advanced Automation for Space
Missions, NASA CP 2255, 1980.
[8] Chirikjian, G., Zhou, Y., and Suthakorn, J., “Self-Replicating Robots for
Lunar Development,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
Vol. 7, No. 4, 2002, pp. 462–472.
doi:10.1109/TMECH.2002.806232
[9] Metzger, P., Muscatello, A., Mueller, R., and Mantovani, J.,
“Affordable, Rapid Bootstrapping of Space Industry and Solar System
Civilization,” Journal of Aerospace Engineering, Vol. 26, No. 1,
Jan. 2013, pp. 18–29.
doi:10.1061/(ASCE)AS.1943-5525.0000236
[10] Kruzelecky, R. V., Wong, B., Aissa, B., Haddad, E., Jamroz, W., Cloutis,
E., Rosca, I. D., Hoa, S. V., Therriault, D., and Ellery, A., “MoonDust
Lunar Dust Simulation and Mitigation,” 40th International Conference
on Environmental Systems, AIAA Paper 2010-6023, 2010.
[11] Von Tisenhausen, G., and Darbro, W., “Self-Replicating Systems,”
NASA TM-78304, 1980.
[12] Moses, M., Ma, H., Wolfe, K., and Chirikjian, G., “An Architecture for
Universal Construction via Modular Robotic Components,” Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 62, No. 7, 2014, pp. 945–965.
doi:10.1016/j.robot.2013.08.005
[13] Ellery, A., An Introduction to Space Robotics, Praxis–Springer Publ.,
Chichester, England, U.K., 2000.
[14] Ellery, A., Planetary Rovers: Robotic Exploration of the Solar System,
Praxis–Springer Publ., Chichester, England, U.K., 2015.
[15] Ellery, A., “A Robotics Perspective on Human Spaceflight,” Earth,
Moon, and Planets, Vol. 87, No. 3, 2001, pp. 173–190.
doi:10.1023/A:1013190908003
[16] Ellery, A., “Humans Versus Robots for Space Exploration and
Development,” Space Policy, Vol. 19, 2003, pp. 87–91.
doi:10.1016/S0265-9646(03)00014-6
[17] Ianni, J., Repperger, D., Baker, R., and Williams, R., “Human Interfaces
for Robotic Satellite Servicing,” Soc. of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers Paper LA4632-14, Bellingham, WA, 2002.
[18] Arcaca, P., and Melchiorri, C., “Control Schemes for Teleoperation with
Time Delay: A Comparative Study,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
Vol. 38, No. 1, 2002, pp. 49–64.
doi:10.1016/S0921-8890(01)00164-6
[19] Imaida, T., Yokokohji, Y., Doi, T., Oda, M., and Yoshikawa, T.,
“Ground-Space Bilateral Teleoperation of ETS-VII Robot Arm by
Direct Bilateral Coupling Under 7 s Time Delay Conditions,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 20, No. 3, 2004,

pp. 499–511.
doi:10.1109/TRA.2004.825271
[20] Ajoudani, A., Tsagarakis, N., and Bicchi, A., “Tele-Impedance:
Teleoperation with Impedance Regulation Using a Body-Machine
Interface,” International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 31, No. 13,
2012, pp. 1642–1656.
doi:10.1177/0278364912464668
[21] Snyder, M., Dunn, J., and Gonzalez, E., “Effects of Microgravity on
Extrusion Based Additive Manufacturing,” AIAA SPACE 2013
Conference and Exposition, AIAA Paper 2013-5439, 2013.
[22] Yan, X., and Gu, P., “Review of Rapid Prototyping Technologies and
Systems,” Computer-Aided Design, Vol. 28, No. 4, 1996, pp. 307–318.
doi:10.1016/0010-4485(95)00035-6
[23] Pham, D., and Dimov, S., “Rapid Prototyping and Rapid Tooling—The
Key Enablers for Rapid Manufacturing,” Proceedings of the Institution
of Mechanical Engineers, Part C: Journal of Mechanical Engineering
Science, Vol. 217, No. 1, 2003, pp. 1–23.
doi:10.1243/095440603762554569
[24] Simchi, A., “Direct Laser Sintering of Metal Powders: Mechanism,
Kinetics and Microstructural Features,” Materials Science and
Engineering: A, Vol. 428, Nos. 1–2, 2006, pp. 148–158..
doi:10.1016/j.msea.2006.04.117
[25] Pham, D., Dimov, S., and Lacan, F., “Selective Laser Sintering:
Applications and Technological Capabilities,” Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Vol. 213, No. 5, 1999, pp. 435–449.
doi:10.1243/0954405991516912
[26] Taminger, K., and Hafley, R., “Electron Beam Freeform Fabrication
(EBF3) for Cost-Effective Near-Net Shape Manufacturing,” NASA
TM-2006-214284, 2006.
[27] Campbell, T., Williams, C., Ivanova, O., and Garrett, B., “Strategic
Foresight Report: Could 3D Printing Change the World?” Atlantic
Council, Oct. 2011, pp. 1–14.
[28] Jones, R., Haufe, P., Sells, E., Iravani, P., Olliver, V., Palmer, C., and
Bowyer, A., “RepRap—The Replicating Rapid Prototype,” Robotica,
Vol. 29, No. 1, 2001, pp. 177–191.
doi:10.1017/S026357471000069X
[29] Laliberte, T., Gosselin, C., and Cote, G., “Practical Prototyping,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Magazine, Vol. 8, No. 3, Sept. 2001, pp. 43–52.
doi:10.1109/100.956813
[30] Lynch, B., Jiang, X.-X., Ellery, A., and Nitzche, F., “Characterization,
Modelling, and Control of NiTi Shape Memory Alloy Based on
Electrical Resistance Feedback,” Journal of Intelligent Material
Systems and Structures, 2015.
[31] Ellery, A., “Ultimate Smart System—Steps Towards a Self-Replicating
Machine,” Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Smart
Materials and Structures, 2015, pp. 225–234.
[32] Xakalashe, B., and Tangstad, M., “Silicon Processing: From Quartz to
Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells,” Southern African Pyrometallurgy,
edited by Jones, R., and den Hoed, P., Southern African Inst. of Mining
and Metallurgy, Johannesburg, 2011.
[33] Reese, C., Roberts, M., Ling, M.-M., and Bao, Z., “Organic Thin Film
Transistors,” Materials Today, Sept. 2004, pp. 20–27.
[34] Fix, W., Ullman, A., Blache, R., and Schmidt, K., “Organic Transistors
as a Basis for Printed Electronics,” Organic Electronics: Structural and
Electronic Properties of OFETs, edited by Woll, C., Wiley-VCH Verlag,
Weinheim, Germany, 2009, pp. 3–15.
[35] Braitenburg, V., Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1984.
[36] Srinivasan, M., “How Bees Exploit Optic Flow: Behavioural
Experiments and Neural Network Models,” Philosophical Transactions
Royal Society, Vol. B337, 1992, pp. 253–259.
doi:10.1098/rstb.1992.0103
[37] Hasslacher, B., and Tilden, M., “Living Machines,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, Vol. 15, Nos. 1–2, 1995, pp. 143–169.
doi:10.1016/0921-8890(95)00019-C
[38] Reynolds, C., “Flocks, Herds and Schools: A Distributed Behavioural
Model,” ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics, Vol. 21, No. 4, 1987,
pp. 25–34.
doi:10.1145/37402
[39] Sahin, E., and Franks, N., “Measurement of Space: From Ants to
Robots,” Proceedings of the EPSRC/BBRC International Workshop on
Biologically Inspired Robotics: The Legacy of W. Grey Walter, Bristol,
Engalnd, U.K., 2002, pp. 241–247.
[40] Siegelmann, H., and Sontag, E., “On the Computational Power of
Neural Nets,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, Vol. 50, No. 1,
1995, pp. 132–150.
doi:10.1006/jcss.1995.1013
[41] Ellery, A., “Artificial Intelligence Through Symbolic Connectionism—
A Biomimetic Rapprochement,” Biomimetic Technologies: Actuators,

Downloaded by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics on April 18, 2016 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/1.A33409

ELLERY

Robotics & Integrated Systems, edited by Ngo, D., Woodhead Publ.,
Cambridge, England, U.K., 2015.
[42] Parberry, I., Circuit Complexity and Neural Networks, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1994.
[43] Ruck, D., Rogers, S., Kabrisky, M., Oxley, M., and Suter, B.,
“Multilayer Perceptron as an Approximation to a Bayes Optimal
Discriminant Function,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
Vol. 1, No. 4, 1990, pp. 296–298.
doi:10.1109/72.80266
[44] Ruck, D., Rogers, S., Kabrisky, M., Maybeck, P., and Oxley, M.,
“Comparative Analysis of Backpropagation and the Extended Kalman
Filter for Training Multilayer Perceptrons,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Vol. 14, No. 6, 1992,
pp. 686–691.
doi:10.1109/34.141559
[45] Hunt, K., Sharbo, D., Zbikowski, R., and Gawthrop, P., “Neural
Networks for Control Systems—A Survey,” Automatica, Vol. 28, No. 6,
1992, pp. 1083–1112.
doi:10.1016/0005-1098(92)90053-I
[46] Alsina, P., and Gehlot, N., “Robot Inverse Kinematics: A Modular
Neural Network Approach,” Proceedings of the IEEE International
Symposium on Circuits and Systems, IEEE Publ., Piscataway, NJ, 1996,
pp. 631–634.
[47] Newton, R., and Xu, Y., “Neural Network Control of a Space
Manipulator,” IEEE Control Systems, Dec. 1993, pp. 14–22.
[48] Panerai, F., and Sandini, G., “Oculo-Motor Stabilisation Reflex:
Integration of Inertial and Visual Information,” Neural Networks,
Vol. 11, 1998, pp. 1191–1204.
doi:10.1016/S0893-6080(98)00026-4
[49] Daugman, J., “Complete Discrete 2D Gabor Transforms by Neural
Networks for Image Analysis and Compression,” IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 36, No. 7, 1988,
pp. 1169–1179.
doi:10.1109/29.1644
[50] Milford, M., Wyeth, G., and Prasser, D., “RatSLAM: A Hippocampal
Model for Simultaneous Localization and Mapping,” Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conf. on Robotics and Automation, IEEE Publ.,
Piscataway, NJ, 2004, pp. 403–408.
[51] Quoy, M., Moga, S., and Gaussieer, P., “Dynamical Neural Networks for
Planning and Low-Level Robot Control,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, Vol. 33,
No. 4, 2003, pp. 523–532.
doi:10.1109/TSMCA.2003.809224
[52] Turing, A., “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the
Entscheidungs Problem,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society, Vol. 42, 1936, pp. 230–265.
[53] Yamashita, Y., and Nakamura, Y., “Neuron Circuit Model with Smooth
Nonlinear Output Function,” Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Nonlinear Theory and Its Applications, Vancouver,
2007, pp. 11–14.
[54] Sparks, D., “Vacuum Reduction of Extraterrestrial Silicates,” Journal of
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1988, pp. 187–189.
doi:10.2514/3.25969
[55] Kruzelecky, R., Wong, B., Zou, J., Haddad, E., Jamroz, W., Cloutis, E.,
Strong, K., Ellery, A., Ghafoor, N., and Ravindran, G., “LORE: Lunar
Origins and Resource Explorer,” Proceedings of the American
Astronautical Society Conference, American Astronautical Soc. Paper
2010-467, Springfield, VA, 2010.
[56] Cross, M., Ellery, A., and Qadi, A., “Estimating Terrain Parameters for a
Rigid Wheeled Rover Using Neural Networks,” Journal of
Terramechanics, Vol. 50, No. 3, 2013, pp. 165–174.
doi:10.1016/j.jterra.2013.04.002
[57] Meir, Y., and Jerby, E., “Microwave Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy
for Material Identification Using Boltzmann-Plot Super-Resolution
Algorithm,” Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on
Microwave Discharges: Fundamentals and Applications, 2012,
pp. 227–230.
[58] Zubrin, R., The Case for Mars, Touchstone Publ., New York, 1996.
[59] Gingery, D., Build Your Own Metal Workshop from Scrap, David
Gingery Publ., Kimberling City, MO, 2011.
[60] Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid, S., Manufacturing Engineering and
Technology, Prentice–Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001.
[61] Wittenburg, L., “In-Situ Extraction of Lunar Soil Volatiles,”
Proceedings Space 94, 4th International Conference & Exposition on
Engineering, Construction & Operations in Space, and Conference &
Exposition/Demonstration on Robotics for Challenging Environments,
WCSAR TR-AR3-9311-3, Albuquerque, NM, 1993.

327
[62] Hansen, C., et al., “SPADE: A Rock-Crushing and Sample-Handling
System Developed for Mars Missions,” Journal of Geophysical
Research, Vol. 112, No. E6, 2007, Paper E06008.
doi:10.1029/2005JE002413
[63] Oder, R., “Magnetic Separation of Lunar Soils,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, Vol. 27, No. 6, 1991, pp. 5367–5370.
doi:10.1109/20.278841
[64] Jakes, P., “Cast Basalt, Mineral Wool and Oxygen Production: Early
Industries for Planetary (Lunar) Outposts,” Lunar and Planetary Inst.
Rept. 77058-1113, Houston, TX, 1998.
[65] Roedder, E., “Use of Lunar Materials in Space Construction,” Space
Solar Power Review, Vol. 2, 1981, pp. 249–258.
[66] Livshits, P., Dikhtyar, V., Inberg, A., Shahadi, A., and Jerby, E., “Local
Doping of Silicon by a Point-Contact Microwave Applicator,”
Microelectronic Engineering, Vol. 88, No. 9, 2011, pp. 2831–2836.
doi:10.1016/j.mee.2011.04.022
[67] Ellery, A., and Cockell, C., “Human Exploration of the Martian Pole Part
2: Support Technologies,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
Vol. 56, Nos. 1–2, 2003, pp. 43–55.
[68] Melosh, H., et al., “Origin of Lunar Mascon Basins,” Science, Vol. 340,
No. 6140, 2013, pp. 1552–1555.
doi:10.1126/science.1235768
[69] Flett, D., “Cobalt-Nickel Separation in Hydrometallurgy: A Review,”
Chemistry for Sustainable Development, Vol. 12, 2004, pp. 81–91.
[70] Terekhov, D., and Emmanual, N., “Direct Extraction of Nickel and Iron
from Laterite Ores Using the Carbonyl Process,” Minerals Engineering,
Vol. 54, Dec. 2013, pp. 124–130.
doi:10.1016/j.mineng.2013.07.008
[71] Meyer, C., and Yang, S., “Tungsten-Bearing Yttrobetafite in Lunar
Granophyres,” American Mineralogist, Vol. 73, 1988, pp. 1420–1425.
[72] Brewer, L., “Thermodynamic Properties of the Oxides and Their
Vaporisation Processes,” Chemical Reviews, Vol. 52, No. 1, 1953,
pp. 1–75.
doi:10.1021/cr60161a001
[73] Gao, Y., Ellery, A., Sweeting, M., and Vincent, J., “Bioinspired Drill for
Planetary Sampling: Literature Survey, Conceptual Design and
Feasibility Study,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 44, No. 3,
2007, pp. 703–709.
doi:10.2514/1.23025
[74] Levi, E., He, J., Zabar, Z., and Birenbaum, L., “Guidelines for the
Design of Synchronous-Type Coilguns,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1991, pp. 628–633.
doi:10.1109/20.101107
[75] McInnes, C., Solar Sailing: Technology, Dynamics and Mission
Applications, Praxis–Springer Publ., Chichester, England, U.K., 1999.
[76] El-Madany, H., Fahmy, F., El-Rahman, A., and Dorrah, H., “Spacecraft
Neural Network Control System Design Using FPGA,” Waset
International Journal Computer, Electrical Automation, Control &
Information Engineering, Vol. 5, No. 9, 2011, pp. 984–990.
[77] Wang, X., “Artificial Neural Net Viterbi Decoder,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, Vol. 44, No. 2, 1996, pp. 165–171.
doi:10.1109/26.486609
[78] Varatharajoo, R., “Combined Energy and Attitude Control System for
Small Satellites,” Acta Astronautica, Vol. 54, No. 10, 2004, pp. 701–
712.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2003.12.004
[79] McInnes, C., “Space-Based Geoengineering: Challenges and Requirements,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C:
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, Vol. 224, No. 3, 2010,
pp. 571–580.
doi:10.1243/09544062JMES1439
[80] Angel, R., “Feasibility of Cooling the Earth with a Cloud of Small
Spacecraft near the Inner Lagrange Point L1,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 103, No. 46, 2006, pp. 17,184–
17,189.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0608163103
[81] McQuade, F., Ward, R., Ortix, F., and McInnes, C., “Autonomous
Configuration of Satellite Formations Using Generic Potential
Functions,” Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Satellite
Constellations and Formation Flying, Pisa, Italy, 2003, pp. 1–9.
[82] Mankins, J., “Fresh Look at Space Solar Power: New Architectures,
Concepts and Technologies,” Proceedings of the International
Astronautics Federation Conference, Paper IAF-97-R.2.03, 1997.

R. J. Sedwick
Associate Editor

