International Journal of
Astrobiology

Engineering a lunar photolithoautotroph to
thrive on the moon – life or simulacrum?

cambridge.org/ija

A A Ellery
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada

Robotic Astrobiology
Cite this article: Ellery AA. Engineering a lunar
photolithoautotroph to thrive on the moon –
life or simulacrum? International Journal of
Astrobiology https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1473550417000532
Received: 1 March 2017
Revised: 21 November 2017
Accepted: 27 November 2017
Key words:
Biomimetic machines; engineered life; lunar
environment; robotic mechanisms;
self-replication
Author for correspondence:
A A Ellery, E-mail: aellery@mae.carleton.ca

Abstract
Recent work in developing self-replicating machines has approached the problem as an engineering problem, using engineering materials and methods to implement an engineering analogue of a hitherto uniquely biological function. The question is – can anything be learned
that might be relevant to an astrobiological context in which the problem is to determine
the general form of biology independent of the Earth. Compared with other non-terrestrial
biology disciplines, engineered life is more demanding. Engineering a self-replicating machine
tackles real environments unlike artificial life which avoids the problem of physical instantiation altogether by examining software models. Engineering a self-replicating machine is also
more demanding than synthetic biology as no library of functional components exists.
Everything must be constructed de novo. Biological systems already have the capacity to
self-replicate but no engineered machine has yet been constructed with the same ability –
this is our primary goal. On the basis of the von Neumann analysis of self-replication, selfreplication is a by-product of universal construction capability – a universal constructor is
a machine that can construct anything (in a functional sense) given the appropriate instructions (DNA/RNA), energy (ATP) and materials (food). In the biological cell, the universal
construction mechanism is the ribosome. The ribosome is a biological assembly line for constructing proteins while DNA constitutes a design specification. For a photoautotroph, the
energy source is ambient and the food is inorganic. We submit that engineering a self-replicating machine opens up new areas of astrobiology to be explored in the limits of life.

Introduction
In this paper, I wish to explore the limits and definition of life in the context of engineered life
(distinct from artificial and synthetic life). Life on Earth is carbon-based and limited to a narrow temperature range defined by the existence of liquid water within the constraints of biochemical sensitivity to temperature – low temperatures reduce metabolic rates while high
temperatures degrade enzymes. This gives us a narrow perspective on what life could be. I submit that from an astrobiological perspective, exploring engineered life is a useful and instructive exercise. If we can be sure of anything, it is that nature is innovative and inventive. Taking
lessons from extrasolar planet astronomy, the galaxy of stellar system configurations discovered
has shown that our own Solar System configuration, rather unexpectedly, is merely one of
many different possibilities. If and when the first discovery of extraterrestrial life occurs, we
can be sure that it will surprise us (unless it is of a panspermia or contamination origin).
Firstly, we will briefly discuss a few definitions of life. Thence, we shall explore an experiment
to artificially construct a lifeform (engineered life) that tests the boundaries of life and perhaps
give us insights into the transition from non-life to life.

Part A: What is life?

© Cambridge University Press 2018

Although some reckon that defining life is futile because it is a folk rather than a scientific
concept (Machery 2012), we shall explore such a definition here. Indeed, a folk-based test of
life has been proposed similar to the Turing ‘imitation game’ test for machine intelligence
(Cronin et al. 2006). It proposes the construction of a chemical cell (chell) – a chemoton –
to imitate a biological cell, perhaps to ingest CO2 and excrete a more environmentally benign
compound. The Viking biochemical experiments may be regarded as an abstraction of this
concept (CO2 input – O2 output), suggesting that perhaps such a functional approach is
not useful. Looking, however, to internal cellular mechanisms, a computer model of a network
of chemical reactions as a primitive metabolism in an amphiphilic membrane has been simulated (Bersini 2010). It is not yet clear how illuminating this type of simulated biochemistry has
been but we shall explore these approaches further. Returning for the moment to defining life,
there have been some vague definitions:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

2

(i) Life is a unity (Chaitin 1970) – this refers to a mathematical
unity as opposed to an autopoietic unity, the latter having
specific and definable properties like autonomy with
self-contained rules (Fleischaker 1989);
(ii) Life is a supple adaptation involving ongoing adaptation to
the environment (Bedau, 1997, 1998).
These definitions are not particularly enlightening or conclusive. Similarly, information-theoretic definitions are purely syntactic and are devoid of semantic interpretation rendering them
incomplete (Zuravlev & Avetisov 2006). The semantic aspect
requires the interpretation of symbols in the context of the real
world to understand the function of those symbols. There is, however, no obvious similarity between objects in the real world and
the symbols to represent them (this is the correspondence problem). Hence, information defined at the level of syntax has little
bearing on pragmatic information which based on its semantic
value –it is at the pragmatic level (phenotype) at which evolutionary selection operates but it is at the syntactic level (genotype) that
information is stored (Cohen & Perrault 1979). The two levels are
both required. A biological cell is a physical biochemical machine
(Laing 1979) – it comprises a power supply, a set of interacting
components interconnected by a wiring system, and a regulatory
control system to coordinate those components to perform selfreproduction as its major task (Tyson & Mackey 2001). Many
definitions of life have listed the various properties of life
(Koshland 2002) – genetic program of instructions, evolution
by natural selection, cellular compartmentalization, energy capture from the environment, regeneration for self-repair and
growth, adaptability to stimuli, and isolation of different metabolic reactions being a fairly common and inclusive list. There
are derivative or equivalent properties that might be favoured.
For instance, reproductive capacity is implicit in the evolutionary
property and thermodynamic openness is implicit in the energy
capture property. The complex interchange of matter and energy
with its environment is implicit in defining metabolic activity.
Futility of Linnaean Classification
Species cannot form clear-cut categories if we admit evolution
which imposes mutability. Of course, this pre-supposes
Darwinian rather than Lamarckian evolution. Similarly, there
may be no clear demarcation between non-life and life if the latter
evolves from the former. For instance, Strecker synthesis of amino
acids is a chemical process while the reverse Krebs cycle is a biological process. There must be intermediate processes which allow
the evolution of the biological from the inorganic (Szostak. 2012).
One possibility in this specific case might be through the hydrolysis of thioesters CH3–CO–SCH3 formed from CO and CH2SH
catalysed by FeS minerals (Wachtershauser 1992). Similarly, selforganization through far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics
exhibits increasing degrees of complexity from physical to biological manifestations – Benard cells in convecting fluids at
Rayleigh number beyond 1760 are a physical phenomenon; the
Belousov–Zhabotinski reaction is a chemical phenomenon of
greater complexity; and the Kauffman NK model of autocatalysis
is a pre-biological phenomenon of still greater complexity. Such
self-organization involves local interactions between components
resulting in emergent global properties without any central control or supervision. Self-organization is a commonly exploited
property of biological systems. For example, self-organization of
the global cytoskeletal architecture of eukaryotic cells is emergent

A A Ellery

from the reaction–diffusion effects of individual cytoskeletal
filaments.
Furthermore, lack of categorizability was manifest in early biological evolution. It is believed that the last universal common
ancestor (LUCA) that eventually diverged into the three main
domains of Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya was constituted from
a community of cellular organisms that were engaged in lateral
gene transfer with elevated mutation rates rather than vertical
gene inheritance (Woese 1998). RNA-based genetic translation
was simple, acting on multiple and redundant short genetic segments, and was error-prone, limiting protein sizes. Different progenitors possessed different metabolic capabilities which would be
shared through lateral gene transfer. This is compatible with the
curious incidence of genes shared by archaea and bacteria simultaneously with the genetic replication mechanism shared by
archaea and eukarya, yet there appear to be strong similarities
in DNA polymerases across all three domains. There was thus
no single evolutionary cell line prior to the divergence of the
great domains whence individual evolutionary cell lines were
established. If so, the early origins of life are shrouded - no wonder that we seek to gain insights a la Richard Feynman (‘what I
cannot create, I do not understand’).
The demarcation of life/non-life illustrates the limitations of
logic classification – such limitations in logic have been well
known in artificial intelligence because logic admits no contradiction (x and not-x cannot both be true), no change over time (x is
true or false at all times), and no exclusion (x is either true or
false). This was the reason for the introduction of degrees of
truth through a veritable host of shades of grey – Bayesian,
Dempster–Shaferian, non-monotonic, circumscriptive, modal,
temporal and fuzzy logics – into artificial intelligence. The most
extreme variation of this is non-well-founded (NWF) set theory
which eschews logic almost entirely (Stepney 2012). Bruylants
et al. (2010) favoured a fuzzy definition of life though, if pressed,
my preference would be for a Bayesian approach for its greater
rigour and versatility. As an example of greyness, there is debate
over the nature of viruses which are commonly classified as nonlife. However, viruses may be controversially characterized as alive
in the sense that they are complex evolving organisms integrated
into their host’s molecular machinery for their own replication –
in this phase of the viral lifecycle, the infected host cell is a viral
cell (Forterre 2010). Viruses are highly efficient replicators
because their host provides the replicating machinery that is
hijacked by the virus. Viruses are an example of the difficulty
in differentiating between life/non-life and the degrees of uncertainty involved. Indeed, from the folk perspective with which
we opened our discussion, they are very much alive because
they are ‘germs’ (though the pre-scientific miasma folk theory
would not have viewed viral infections as being transmitted
through living organisms).
Metabolism
All physicochemical reactions tend towards the lowest Gibbs free
energy state according to the second law of thermodynamics.
Living systems maintain themselves in a far-from-equilibrium
state through the consumption of external energy. Metabolism
is a network of chemical reactions and implies that the provision
and consumption of energy are necessary to maintain and grow
itself. Due to the second law of thermodynamics, this energy
must be supplied from the environment. Such thermodynamically
open systems form dissipative structures characterized by energy

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

dissipation through dynamically stable structures under far-fromequilibrium conditions. It has been suggested that life creates
more entropy in the universe through dissipative processes over
ecological timescales than non-life, essentially driven by their efficient consumption of energy (Ulanowicz & Hannon 1987). A
high-energy gradient in the environment is limited in its dissipative capability, creating local, highly ordered complex structures
(life) far from thermal equilibrium to increase energy dissipation
(Schneider & Kay 1994). Biological processes exploit captured
energy to move far away from thermodynamic equilibrium to a
state of low entropy with respect to the environment by storing
the maximum exergy available (the maximum exergy principle)
(Jorgensen & Fath 2004). Exergy is defined as the energy available
for useful work. The maximum exergy principle is a version of Le
Chatelier’s principle that energy inputs shift equilibrium compositions of reaction systems. From this, metabolism may be defined
as a system of self-maintenance that controls energy flows
through the system (Moreno Bergareche & Ruiz-Mirazo 1999).
This management of energy with precise control of energy
flows is essential to organize the material construction of metabolic substrates. We may regard metabolism powered by energy
sources as a fundamental ingredient of life. The most basic
form of metabolism for the generation of energy is the physicochemical redox couple involving electron donors and electron
acceptors, such as anoxygenic photosynthesis by green and purple
sulphur bacteria. They reduce sulphate as the electron acceptor
(oxidant) to release H2S as an electron donor for the reduction
of CO2.
Physical metabolism involving both material and energy processes is a necessary component of life (Boden 2003). This disavows artificial life which considers only informational and
evolutionary aspects of life without consideration of physicality.
If the autopoietic aspect of self-production is an essential component of life, then evolutionary robots are excluded because while
their evolved behaviours are informational, their bodies are artificially pre-constructed without metabolic exchange with the environment. Furthermore, evolutionary algorithms are driven by
user-defined fitness functions rather than the open-ended evolution of biology. Contrarily, a self-replicating machine is fundamentally self-created from its physical environment where
self-replication is an extension of self-repair which itself is a
form of self-maintenance. Its capability to create physical copies
of itself from the environment is a form of self-production so
this would admit self-replicating machines to the ranks of life.
Encapsulation
The autopoietic definition of life proposes that life is a cellular system capable of self-production and self-maintenance through a
network of processes within a self-made boundary that adapts
to its environment (Bich & Damiano 2007; Damiano & Luigi
Luisi 2010). Self-production implies that genetic information is
available while self-maintenance necessitates that there are metabolic processes. Autopoiesis emphasizes identity (referred to as
autonomy) as a continuous and dynamic self-regeneration – a
process of autopoietic self-organization (Maturana 1975).
Structural identity and physical integrity of the lifeform – the
cell – is derivative from the processes it encapsulates from its
environment, i.e. metabolism. It is this metabolic activity that
allows the entity to adapt to its environment through a continuous cycling of anabolic and catabolic processes, i.e. selfproduction and self-maintenance are the result of the same

3

underlying process. An autopoietic system involves homeostatic
processes that are autocatalytic as a whole by continually producing and recycling its components. An illustrative minimal autopoietic model is based on a two-dimensional (2D) cellular array
which may be occupied by one of three types of particles: S
(substrate), K (catalyst) and L (link) subject to three chemical
reactions (Varela et al. 1974):
Production : S + S + K  L + K
Bonding : L + L  −L = L −
Disintegration : L  S + S (spontaneous)
Chains of L particles can form a closed membrane that is permeable to S particles but impermeable to K and L particles, i.e. cell
membrane structures. Initially, at least one K particle is enclosed
within an L-membrane through which S particles permeate. These
S particles are catalysed by K within the membrane to increase the
concentration of L particles which cannot escape. As internal
stresses build, the membrane ruptures due to disintegration.
However, the high concentration of L ensures that they will seal
the L-chain membrane. This models a continual cycle of anabolism and catabolism of the L-membrane. This cycle generates a
steady state of the form:
dx
dt = kx − gx

where k is growth rate and g is decay rate. Dynamic equilibrium
occurs when k = g such that dx/dt = 0. The inhibition of bonding
of L particles near chains of L particles is an essential feature in
autopoietic modelling to prevent premature L-chain formation
(McMullin & Varela 1997). This computational model and others
(Schwegler & Tarumi 1986; Cui & Friedman 1999) prove the
computability of autopoiesis (McMullin 2004), refuting postulations that autopoiesis is non-computable.
Membrane-enclosed vesicles that separate self from non-self
are an important property of life (Weber 2010). The importance
of a cell membrane to separate an internally controlled environment from the external environment has long been recognized,
but both the coacervate and proteinoid concepts were implausible
in lacking continuity with biological membranes. Intriguingly,
lipid-like amphiphilic compounds such as PAHs, pyrene and
fluoranthene have been extracted from the Murchison meteorite
(Deamer & Pashley 1989). Amphiphilic molecules comprise a
polar hydrophilic tail and hydrophobic head which induces
them to spontaneously self-assemble into vesicles as proto-cells
(Deamer et al. 2002). Self-assembly is spontaneous with amphiphilic molecules – they form a single-layer surface membrane
on water with hydrophobic heads oriented above the surface
and hydrophilic tails in the water. High concentrations of phospholipids form a double layer which encloses vesicles formed by
high surface tension. Amphiphilic molecules may form via
Fischer–Tropsch reactions catalysed on mineral surfaces. The
membrane must be semipermeable to allow the flow of selective
materials and energy. Self-assembling lipid membranes are an
obvious candidate for early biological membranes. Reverse
micelles may represent a minimal autopoietic system (Luigi
Luisi & Varela 1989). They spontaneously self-organize into
cells within which host aqueous chemical reactions produce its
boundary surfactants (comprising a polar head and aliphatic

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

4

A A Ellery

tail). Alternatively, proto-membranes may have been iron/
sulphur-based, formed near hydrothermal vents (Martin &
Russell 2003). The vesicles enclose polymers which may be
formed in a number of plausible ways. Simple precursors to
organic molecules that underlie biology can be synthesized into
polymers in Miller–Urey-type reactions catalysed by clays under
reducing conditions (such as CH4 + NH3 + H2 or CO2 + H2 + N2
or CH4 + H2O + N2 atmospheres) with an energy source by
Strecker condensation. Formaldehyde can be synthesized by
photochemical reactions in Earth’s primitive atmosphere as the
primary step towards biochemical materials (Pinto et al. 1980):
CO2 + 2H2  H2 CO + H2 O
From formaldehyde, many biological molecules may be
synthesized:
(a) Production of the pentose sugar ribose:
5H2 CO  C5 H10 O5
(b) HCN may be synthesized under primitive Earth conditions
(Oro et al. 1959):
H2 CO + NH2 OH  HCN + 2H2 O
(c) Amino acid glycine may be produced from HCN:
3HCN + 2H2 O  C2 H5 O2 N + CN2 H2
(d) The purine base adenine may be produced from HCN:
5HCN  C5 H5 N5
Although Miller–Urey-type reactions have been questioned as
pre-biotic processes on early Earth, similarly synthesized biochemical products may be concentrated into protocells by
semi-permeable membranes that form spontaneously from phospholipids in water. More complex, multi-compartment lipid vesicles represent models of artificial cells in which multi-step
biochemical reactions can be implemented (Elani et al. 2014).
There have even been suggestions that a minimum of two membranes can implement computing functions (Paun, 2000).
Liposomes are engineered vesicles for delivering drugs to the
human body formed from the hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties of amphiphilic lipids in water (Mozafari 2005). Self-assembled
membrane bilayer vesicles formed by self-assembly of lipids constitute a minimal protocell – embedded primitive pigments such
as porphyrins can convert photonic energy into electrochemical
proton gradients for phosphorylation (Morowitz et al. 1988).
The cytoskeleton network of actin, microtubules and intermediate
filaments in biological cells are fundamental in providing the basis
for cell shape, compartmentation and intracellular traffic. The
incorporation of hydrogel fibrillary networks self-assembled by
hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds in liposomes presents a simplified artificial analogue of a biological cell with an
internal cytoskeleton (Brizard & van Esch 2009). Artificial cells
must include information-laden replicating molecules, polymerases to catalyse replicating molecules, and a translation system
to convert genetic information into protein synthesis instructions
(Pohorille & Deamer 2002). The protocell of the RNA world is

premised on two RNA replicating molecules – one as a genomic
template and the other as a ribozyme that catalyses the synthesis
of amphiphilic lipids for the membrane (Szostak et al. 2001).
Vesicles can then reproduce through amphiphilic growth until
the lipid capsule becomes unstable and fissions into two vesicles.
These arguments suggest that encapsulation from the environment is an essential feature of life.
Self-replication
The autopoietic view of life does not consider self-replication specifically, so autopoiesis may be regarded as a necessary but not
sufficient condition for life (Luigi Luisi 2003; Froese & Stewart
2010). Indeed, according to autopoietic theory, reproduction is
not a necessary property of living systems, but is merely a derivative property enabled by the unity of the living system for that
unity to be multiplied (Varela et al. 1974). It is conceivable that
a living organism could exist that was incapable of self-replication
– such an organism would have to emerge without any evolutionary heritage through pure self-organization. It has been suggested
that a spontaneously emerging self-replicator on Earth would not
have possessed an overall complexity exceeding 100–200 bits over
the background environment (Jacobson 1959). A necessary
adjunct to autopoiesis is autogenesis which emphasizes the emergence of self-replication (Csanyi & Kampus 1985). Autopoiesis
has been proposed to be part of a larger concept of (M, R) systems
where M, metabolic activity and R, repair activity collectively
imply that self-repairing metabolism is capable of replication
(Letelier et al. 2003). This implies that not all replicating systems
are autopoietic. Autopoietic systems are further characterized by
operational closure where metabolic processes feed into each
other in a circular causal network. Autopoiesis must be supplemented with an open-ended evolution property (Ruiz-Mirazo
et al. 2004), for it is the evolutionary process that yields increased
organismic complexity over time (Saunders & Ho, 1976).
Evolution is a learning process whereby information is
extracted from the environment and incorporated into the lifeform. Darwinian evolution is a universal phenomenon premised
on the notion of stored (genetic) information for which three
properties occur: (i) variation (errors) due to random genetic
mutation, (ii) selection favouring fitter individuals to a specific
environment and (iii) inheritance whereby fitter individuals
copy their characteristics onto the next generation through their
offspring. The last implies the ability to generate copies, i.e. selfreplication. Evolutionary capacity thus implies a self-reproductive
capacity for mutation to operate during the copying process.
Using λ-calculus, it has been demonstrated that self-replication
logically precedes self-maintenance (Fontana & Buss 1994). By
definition, autopoietic systems are to be differentiated from allopoietic systems. The latter converts raw material into a product
(comprising an organized conjunction of those materials) other
than itself, an example being a factory. Clearly, by definition, a
self-replicating entity is not an allopoietic system because it yields
products of itself. ‘The living is a factory that makes itself from
within’ (Luigi Luisi 2003). Self-replication may thus be viewed
as an essential ingredient of life. The so-called mule problem is
readily dismissed in that reproductive capacity is potential rather
than actual. Furthermore, evolutionary capacity is a property of
populations rather than individuals – mules are part of an evolving gene pool of a population (Chodasewicz 2014).
The earliest form of replication may have been uncoded and
implemented through autocatalytic sets of organic polymers

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

with Lamarckian inheritance (Gabora 2006). Regardless of the
nature of early self-replication, life may have emerged when a
non-metabolic replicator acquired metabolism to exploit external
energy sources. It thus acquired purposefulness (Pross 2008).
Purposefulness as a characteristic of life has its roots in
physicochemical reactions of metabolism during replication.
Purposefulness arises through dynamic kinetic stability maintained by a persistent metabolism as distinct from thermodynamic stability representing a state of maximum decay.
Kinetic stability is a unique property of persistent replicating systems and is dependent on the environment (Pross 2005a). The
competition for finite resources imposes a trend towards increasing kinetic stability –survival of the most stable. Complex replicators are kinetically more stable than simple replicators, hence
driving evolution towards greater complexity (Pross 2005b).
These arguments suggest that self-replication is indeed, an essential property of life.
The definition of life is implicit in the origin of life question of
whether metabolism or self-replication was the first property of
life to emerge. In terrestrial life, folded molecular chains effectively implement computational processes as program strings,
while molecular encoding in genes acts as a blueprint for the construction of these molecular chains, and through templating, the
molecular codes implement their self-reproduction (Laing
1975). The two aspects of life – genotype and phenotype – appear
inextricable.
The RNA world attempts to circumvent the chicken-and-theegg problem of metabolism versus genetic replication (Lazcano
2010). RNA comprises a phosphate–ribose–phosphate backbone
with nucleotide links forming a chain polymer. Within the
RNA world, RNA acts as both a store of genetic information
and as an organic catalyst for metabolic activity. This RNA
world was enabled by its possession of both genotype (as RNA
bases) and phenotype (as ribozymes). Information is held in the
nucleotide base sequence while its folding pattern forms the catalytic structure. It suggests that RNA polymers (ribozymes) could
catalyse their own synthesis and self-replicate, thereby establishing
both metabolism and self-replication, perhaps encapsulated
within a vesicle. The rRNA of the ribosome is a type of ribozyme.
RNA replicase is an RNA molecule that is a template for genetic
information and acts as an RNA polymerase to replicate itself. A
simple protocell would comprise RNA replicase within a vesicle
using nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) for energy (Szostak et al.
2001). As a single RNA molecule cannot simultaneously act as
template and polymerase, two RNA molecules are required.
Hence, molecular networks of RNA are required to sustain
cooperative cycles of production (Pross & Pascal 2013). RNA replication requires the RNA replicase protein which begs the need
for a supporting metabolism, i.e. an interconnected gene–metabolism–encapsulation triumvirate network (Rasmussen et al.
2003). Autocatalysis involves the presence of a product catalysing
the original reagents – thus RNA acts as a template for assembling
further RNA molecules. The emergence of genetic encoding of
metabolic and lipid reaction rates is believed to involve some
kind of autocatalytic feedback mechanism (Hordijk 2013).
Alternatively, peptide nucleic acid (PNA) has a hydrophobic polypeptide rather than phosphate–sugar backbone but with the same
base pairing as DNA or RNA. PNA can act as an electron relay
system with modifications. PNA replicates through ligation rather
than the ribozymes that act as their own replicase required of
RNA replication. The insertion of non-organic material into a
proto-organism emphasizing a building blocks approach offers

5

one possible transition between non-living and living matter
(Rasmussen et al. 2003). However, the existence of RNA rather
than PNA in today’s terrestrial biology as a mediator between
DNA and proteins favours the RNA world. RNA performs multiple functions – mRNA constitutes transportation mechanisms,
tRNA constitutes jigs and rRNA constitutes the planner and controller for the ribosomes. However, RNA replication is more
prone to error than DNA replication, and so subject to strong
evolutionary processes. The DNA–protein world may have
emerged from the RNA world through retroviral-like mechanisms. A protocell containing a self-replicating catalytic DNA
may have represented the first living organism. Although specific
to life on earth, the RNA world incorporated metabolism, selfreplication and encapsulation. Life then is a collective set of
properties.
Control systems
Cybernetic systems are another necessary and complementary
component of living systems involving specific sensory inputs
triggering specific actions, i.e. its internal processes are adapted
to its environment (Bourgine & Stewart 2004). This implies that
control mechanisms are an essential feature of life.
It may be instructive to examine synthetic biology in the
Feynman tradition that creating yields understanding. To create
artificial cells, simple biological cells may be simplified further
(top-down) or assembled de novo from scratch from biological
and non-biological materials (bottom-up) (Rasmussen et al.
2004). In bottom-up synthesis, lipid vesicles may be selfassembled by amphiphilic aggregation encapsulating selfreplicating RNA or the simpler PNA. Synthetic biology is also a
bottom-up process that blurs the distinction between naturally
evolved living organisms whose only goal is survival and humandesigned and manufactured machines of inorganic material that
serve human-dictated purposes (the latter being the subjectmatter of this paper). In synthetic biology, new functionality to
biological cells (acting as a chassis) can be introduced to complement natural biological nucleic acid/protein biochemistry
(Benner & Sismour 2005). Self-replication in biology occurs
through molecular template copying of genetic information
which encodes physical properties of the lifeform. This requires
molecular pattern recognition of which Watson–Crick pairing
of large purines with small pyramidines (A–T and G–C) through
hydrogen bonds is an example. An indispensable part of this recognition process is the phosphate–ribose backbone with its
repeating charge. Shuffling hydrogen bond links permits the addition of four further base pairs forming a synthetic genetic alphabet (Sismour & Benner 2005). Similarly in proteins, different
amino acids from the standard 20 can be introduced. Amino
acids in polypeptide chains interact with each other due to their
folding. Artificial polypeptides can be constructed from amphiphilic side chains of amino acids that replicate specific protein
folding (Deming 1997). This complements pre-existing biology
within the constraints of biochemistry. Synthetic biology is
exploring the limits of life further by attempting to re-design
the biological realm to construct genetically engineered machines
(Gibbs 2004). There are three main thrusts: (i) synthesis of a minimal protocell; (ii) synthesis of minimal genomes; (iii) genetically
engineered machines. Synthetic biology applies an engineering
philosophy to biological components to build engineering functions from those biological components. It is the complement
to the self-replicating machine concept explored later which

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

6

uses engineered components to build a (biological) selfreplication function. The major thrust of synthetic biology is
the manufacture of a library or toolbox of logical functions
from standardized biological genes that can yield biological components assembled to implement a specific device (McDaniel &
Weiss 2005). These genetic segments of DNA – BioBricks –
encode for biological components that implement known characteristics such as logic gates, sensors, actuators, etc that can be
assembled like molecular Lego into cellular circuits such as logical
implication and even more complex logics such as filters and
feedback loops (Endy 2005). Bistable switches have been developed which can act as memory elements which are heritable
from one generation to the next. Similarly, the inverter BioBrick
implements a NOT function which, with the AND BioBrick, provides logical universality through the composite NAND operator.
These would be expressed within synthetic cells acting as chassis
organisms. Nevertheless, they would retain their autopoietic character including self-production and self-reproduction and so be
subject to evolutionary pressures. Hence, it would be humandesigned in origin but will exist as a biological organism
(Deplazes & Huppenbauer 2009). This follows a similar logic to
the self-replicating machine. However, in the Registry of
Standard Biological Parts, many of the synthetic biology parts
were of poor quality and did not function reliably, did not work
when combined into circuits, were too complex to use, induced
complex undesired reactions in the host cell, and desired functions often operated periodically rather continuously (Kwok
2010). These difficulties will not plague the engineered selfreplicating machine presented later. There are more severe limits
to synthetic biology (Zakeri & Carr 2015). The chief problem in
creating biological circuits is their long operation times compared
with electronic circuits. Furthermore, as designed genetic circuits
become larger and more complex, there is an increasing probability of mutation or genetic rearrangement. As manufactured functionality does not improve the fitness of the chassis organisms,
there will be selection pressure to evolve out that functionality
over time. Indeed, this occurs very rapidly, suggesting that fears
of synthetic organisms escaping and engaging in damaging interactions with the outside environment are unfounded (Tucker &
Zilinskas 2006). Building in redundancy may improve the robustness and stability of the synthetic function but it will not suppress
evolutionary processes. If a mechanism is found to suppress evolution, then these synthetic organisms would no longer be alive
(Schark 2012). Autopoiesis would be compromised because continuous self-regeneration would no longer operate. The organism
would have a complex organization but no longer any selforganization capacity. However, it has been asserted that selforganization with complex global phenomena emerging from
simple local microscopic phenomena is, in fact, a functional property of life (Bedau 1992).
Movement in some form is implicit in biological systems in
order to acquire and transport nutrients (see the Appendix on
molecular motors). All molecular motors convert chemical energy
into mechanical work. Switching between biological conformations which is fundamental to biological molecules may be
regarded as a form of self-assembly which can be described formally as graph grammars (Klavins 2004). Molecular motors
evolved from such molecular switches – kinesin, myosin and G
proteins appear to have evolved from an ancestral nucleotidebinding protein while F1-ATP synthase seems to have evolved
from a different nucleotide-binding protein (Vale 1999).
Kinesins comprise a superfamily that has evolved a diverse set

A A Ellery

of functions through gene duplication while dynein molecular
motors appear to have been conserved (Goldstein 2001). All however evolved in early eukaryotes in a wide variety of cargohandling types, sometimes with different motors recruited for
similar functions – actin is used for membrane transport in
plant cells while microtubules are used for the same in animal
cells (Vale 2003). While certain motors may be dominant in different species, mitotic kinesins are common to all eukaryotes.
Porters – such as kinesin – that walk along microtubules have
high duty ratio while rowers – such as myosin – that operate in
teams have low duty ratio. Kinesin is the most abundant motor
in most eukaryotic cells and is similar to myosin insofar as they
both comprise two heavy chains and two light chains. The
heavy chains fold into the two globular heads each containing
the ATPase sites. Kinesin is the smallest motor protein of ∼340
amino acids compared with ∼850 amino acids of myosin and
∼1000 amino acids of dynein. Kinesin and myosin motors
respectively share a common core structure and function by
ATP-powered conformation changes (Kull et al. 1996; Vale &
Milligan 2000). One common feature in both motors is the almost
identical γ-phosphate sensor to detect presence or absence of a
single phosphate (ADP/ATP) – it comprises two loops that
form hydrogen bonds with the γ phosphate. The relay loop
moves like a piston with an upstroke on phosphate binding and
downstroke on phosphate release. Kinesin and myosin appear
to have evolved from a common ancestor with G proteins.
Myosin V is a special myosin which transports organelles along
actin filaments; kinesins have evolved similar mechanisms for
multi-step motion. Motors also operate in prokaryotes. Plasmid
and chromosome segregation in mitosing prokaryotic cells is
undertaken by homologues of actin filaments acting as cables
(Gerdes et al. 2004). Furthermore, these and other actin-like proteins such as MreB and ParM act like centromeres for plasmid
segregation during mitosis (Egelman 2003). MreB cell shape proteins form large spirals in rod-shaped bacterial cells acting as a
precursor cytoskeleton – MreB proteins are absent in spherical
bacteria, however. MreB proteins have a similar structure to filamentous actin in eukaryotes and indicate that the eukaryotic cytoskeleton originated in the prokaryotic domain (van den Ent et al.
2001a).
Bacterial FtsZ (filamentous temperature-sensitive) protein
involved in bacterial mitosis is similar to eukaryotic tubulin that
is the basis of its cytoskeleton (van den Ent et al. 2001b). FtsZ
is a ubiquitous and highly conserved GTPase in most eubacteria
including chloroplasts and mitochondria and is common in
archaea. Although there is limited amino acid homology
(10–18%) between FtsZ and α- and β-tubulins of eukaryotes,
they are similar in structure with common folds suggesting a common evolutionary origin. In eukaryotic cells, however, chromosome segregation during mitosis is undertaken by microtubule
fibres fixed to the centromere which pull the chromosomes
apart (Taylor 2001). Eukaryotic cells can form extended mitochondrial filaments forming cable networks connected by intermitochondrial junctions for the transmission of energy through
the cell (Skulachev 2001). It has been suggested that fibres are a
ubiquitous feature of biological material – they form the cytoskeleton as the basis for cytoplasmic streaming, cilia and flagella
movement, chromosome migration, cytokinesis and muscle contraction (Frixione 2000). The cyclic reaction of a motor protein
with a cytoskeletal fibre is a common architecture – the myosin
motor on actin filaments and the dynein and kinesin motors on
microtubule filaments. On binding with the filament, the motor

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

protein in each case undergoes a conformation change (power
stroke) to generate a movement step. The motor then releases
the filament before rejoining further up the filament for a
repeated step.
Bacterial flagella are powered by motors that can rotate in
either direction (Blair 1995). When the bacterial motor turns
counter-clockwise, the filaments of the flagellum form a bundle
that propels the cell along a smooth trajectory. If a motor reverses
direction clockwise, the bundle unfolds into an array of individual
uncoordinated movements generating tumbling. Typical motion
is essentially alternation between runs and tumbles, i.e. a random
walk. Directionality involves controlling the frequency of reversals
in response to sensory detection of stimulants. The detection of
attractor stimulants such as glucose suppresses the clockwise tumbling. Conversely, clockwise runs in unfavourable directions are
suppressed by repellants. When bound to a repellant, Tar protein
receptors in the cell membrane stimulate autophosphorylation of
CheA which transfers its phosphate group to CheY. Phosphated
CheY then interacts with the flagellar motor to increase the probability of tumbling by clockwise rotation of its flagellar motor.
When bound to an attractor, CheY remains unphosphorylated
and increases the probability of straight swimming by anticlockwise rotation of the flagellar motor. In fact, it is the change in
concentration over time that is measured, requiring a short-term
memory capability implemented by methylation of the chemoreceptors. Hence, the bacterium propels itself in the direction of
higher concentrations of nutrients. Bacteria can also form highly
complex colonies with the emergent functional and cognitive
properties of a multicellular super-organism. These bacterial communities exhibit a number of modes of inter-cell biochemical signalling such as quorum sensing and chemotactic sensing
(Ben-Jacobs 2009).
In prokaryotes, most movement is passive though it is essential
as a life function nonetheless. In terrestrial water-laden environments, nutrients flow passively so that static organisms can intercept them. Once acquired, these nutrients are ingested by bacteria
and migrate within the bacterial cell by passive diffusive processes.
Some bacteria have invented rotary motors to drive flagella to
move in search of nutrients more efficiently. Furthermore, in
some bacteria, the rudiments of internal transport tracks have
evolved. In eukaryotes, such tracks are adopted for internal movement of cargo within the cell. They are also spanned by linear
‘legged’ motors which tend to be large in comparison with rotary
motors. Is it not conceivable for some postulated exo-bacteria to
have evolved proto-tracks spanned by bacterial rotary motors
similar to a rack-and-pinion gear in, perhaps, a more hostile
environment? My contention is that movement to acquire and
transport nutrients is a necessary condition for life, a consideration not usually appreciated given that Earth’s environment
often provides this facility for free at the scale of bacteria.
Furthermore, internal/external is defined relative to an enclosing
membrane – movement internally and externally achieves the
same goal of accessing resources for consumption. We contend
that movement implies a cybernetic control system as a necessary
condition of life.
Life as a list of properties
Hence, we are back to a list of properties of life embedded in an
environment from which it must consume resources. The properties of life may be ascertained from the bacterial genome and its
coding – a typical bacterial genome comprises 30% non-protein

7

coding genes, 10% for energy metabolism, 17% for genetic transcription and translation, 12% for cell transport and 8% to cell
envelope proteins such as adhesins (Bloom 1995). Our generalized list of properties is thus:
(i) Self-maintenance and growth through metabolic processes
through the ingestion of matter and energy and the excretion
of waste;
(ii) Self-boundary through cellular encapsulation from the environment by constructive metabolism;
(iii) Self-reproduction capability and therefore capacity to evolve
in response to environmental pressures;
(iv) Cybernetic facility through adaptive control system mechanisms to adapt to the environment.
The unofficial NASA definition of life attributed to Gerald
Joyce is: ‘Life is a self-sustained chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian evolution’. Although there are dissenters to this
definition (Luisi 1998), it is succinct and there are a number of
characteristics implicit in this definition. Chemical system implies
metabolic biochemistry and Darwinian evolution requires selfreproduction. As a chemical system, it excludes artificial life but
does not exclude engineered life. Capacity for Darwinian evolution does not require life to have an evolutionary history, only
an evolutionary future, though an evolutionary past may be
inferred in natural systems. All life on the Earth is carbon-based
involving water as the fundamental biochemical solvent and
most astrobiology work is premised on this. The lack of detection
of organic material on Mars by Viking’s gas chromatograph mass
spectrometer (though this result has since been contested)
trumped the detection of labelled CO2 from its labelled release
experiment on that basis (the overall conclusion has not changed
even in the light of contested measurements). Hypothetical silicon-based life or liquid ammonia as a biochemical solvent has
not been entertained seriously. For instance, Si does not form
double sp or triple sp2 bonds but its d orbitals do permit the formation of dπ–pπ bonds. Nevertheless, there have been attempts to
consider life from a broader perspective (Schulze-Makuch &
Irwin 2008). The work presented here is part of an ongoing
research programme that will explore several key open issues in
engineered life including ‘How does life arise from the nonliving?’
(Bedau et al. 2000). In doing so, we retain the control system
property of life. As pointed out in (Brack & Trouble 2010),
robotics has been emulating many of the characteristics of life
including replicating and evolving behavioural properties through
genetic algorithms (Eiben 2014). Evolutionary robotics involves
using genetic algorithms to evolve neural networks to implement
specific behaviours on physical robots. Of great interest is
coevolution of both behaviour and bodily morphology. Robotics
to date, however, has not yet demonstrated self-replication of bodily form. This is what we explore here.

Part B: What could be life?
Self-replicating automata
Looking to artificial life as an exploration of non-terrestrial life,
the key motivation is to broaden from life-as-we-know-it to lifeas-it-could-be (Umerez 2010). There are three approaches: (a)
soft artificial life involving software simulations; (b) hard artificial
life involving hardware implementations; (c) wet artificial life
involving chemical implementations (Bedau 2003). Our approach

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

8

is a combination of all three to form a fourth approach: (d) engineered life involving manufacturing physical resources.
Cellular automata (CA) constitute the main modelling environment for artificial life. Indeed, there are many examples of
CA models of different biological phenomena including developmental biology (Ermentrout & Edelatein-Keshet 1993; Calabretta
1998). CA are highly abstract but serve to illustrate the logic of life
divorced from the physicality of life. CA comprise a chain (1D) or
lattice (2D) of cells, each of which can be in one of a finite number k of possible states. They are updated every discrete timestep
with a well-defined transition rule that depends on the state of its
R neighbours. The simplest CA is a 1D string of cells, the states
(with two states 0 and 1) of which are dependent on the flanking
neighbours. For 2D arrays, there are two commonly adopted
neighbourhoods: the von Neumann neighbourhood consists of
the R = 4 neighbouring cells to the north, south, east and west;
the Moore neighbourhood consists of the R = 8 neighbouring
cells to the north, south, east, west, north-east, south-east, northwest and south-west. Hence, each cell is a finite state machine
with transition rules applied only locally based on the local neighbouring states. The CA can simulate different Wolfram universes
of logic (Wolfram 2002): in class 1, initial configurations evolve to
a fixed configuration; in class 2, initial configurations evolve to a
periodic cycle of configurations; in class 3, initial configurations
evolve into chaotic behaviour; in class 4, initial configurations
evolve complex localized structures with global behaviours.
Class 1 and 2 CAs exhibit only localized information transmission
(λ = 0); in class 3 and 4 CAs, information transfer is however global (λ > 0). The dynamic Langton λ factor which varies from 0 to
(1–1/k) – defined as the fraction of active output states in the rule
table – attempts to quantify these classes and defines a critical
value λc that corresponds to class 4 at the ‘edge of chaos’. It has
been suggested that this class possesses the capacity for universal
computation but it has been questioned whether CAs can be
quantified in this fashion. Nevertheless, the notion of computability in CAs is an important property which defines the capacity of
the specific CA (Mitchell 1998). Central to computability is the
Turing machine and the limit imposed by the Turing halting
problem that there exists no general algorithm that can predict
whether an algorithm halts, i.e. halting is undecidable (Turing
1937). However, halting is decidable in a two-state CA with a
von Neumann neighbourhood. The simplest CAs that support
universal computation have k = 18 and R = 3 in 1D and k = 3
and R = 3 in 2D (Wolfram 1985). A 1D CA with (m + n + 2) states
can simulate a Turing machine with n states and m alphabetic
letters.
Conway’s Game of ‘Life’ is a CA system of 2D cells that illustrates the phenomenon of emergence. Each cell has two (binary)
states – it is either alive (1) or dead (0). The next state is determined by the state of its eight neighbours (Moore neighbourhood) according to specific local rules. If there are three living
neighbours, its state is alive; if there are two or less or four or
more living neighbours, the cell dies of loneliness or overcrowding
respectively. From the interaction of such simple cells, highly
ordered complex structures can emerge (Crutchfield 1994) –
the glider is a local pattern that moves through the CA array
diagonally as an integrated unit. The glider gun configuration
emits regularly spaced gliders every 30 time steps. If a glider
encounters a square block of four cells, they collide and mutually
disintegrate – a law of physics that is not specified in the CA rule
set. Hence, complex structures can emerge from very simple cell
rules. Although the rules are local, they can yield globally

A A Ellery

emergent phenomena such as universal computation. ‘Life’ is
capable of universal computation by exploiting glider guns and
gliders. Logic functions are constructed by interacting streams
of gliders. For example, a NOT gate is implemented by two perpendicular gliders colliding and annihilating each other. AND/
OR gates can be implemented similarly while memory is implemented through circulating gliders. Of course, such implementations of universal computation are cumbersome and impractical.
Artificial chemistry (AC) such as Squirm3 has successfully modelled the emergence of self-replicating molecules (Hutton 2002).
AC is a form of CA that defines a triple (S,R,A) where S = set of
all possible molecules, R = set of collision rules and A = algorithm
defining physical rules. Unlike CAs, artificial chemistries do not
constrain the movement of molecules to a regular grid. Bonds
are formed between atoms on collision but bonds can be broken
by reactions. A set of eight reactions defining how two different
atoms combine to form molecules are sufficient to permit
the spontaneous emergence of self-replicators from a primordial
soup of atoms.
The first systematic consideration of self-replicating machines
was that of John von Neumann (von Neumann & Burks 1966).
His 2D CA-based self-replicating machine required each cell to
have 29 states including an inactive state. The CA model comprised five major subsystems: (i) a program of instructions; (ii)
a sequencer; (iii) a controller; (iv) a constructor arm; and (v) a
workspace environment. A more physically realistic kinematic
model of the von Neumann self-replicator comprised eight different components in two major systems – four logic components
for control signals and four mechanical elements for structure
and mobility. The two major subsystems were: (i) a tape unit,
itself comprising a linear memory tape and a tape control unit,
i.e. a universal Turing machine (computer); (ii) a constructing
unit comprises a robot arm and an arm control unit, i.e. a universal constructor. The control program is stored on the memory
tape that instructs the robotic arm to select, acquire and assemble
components from a sea of pre-fabricated constituent parts in the
working environment – in effect, it was a self-assembling
machine. The construction unit signals the tape unit and
reads the instructions as a set of (x0, y0) start coordinates and
(Δx, Δy) movements for the robot arm. Thus, the universal
Turing machine and the universal constructor send sequences
of signals to each other to control the construction of the machine
according to the program blueprint. The robotic arm picks up a
part from the environment and inspects it to compare it with
the program’s specifications. If correct, it joins this new part
with the ongoing assembly. The robotic arm model of the universal constructor is essentially a pick-and-place assembly manipulator. If the tape constitutes a description of itself, the constructor
arm builds a copy of itself. It then copies its program and inserts
it into the new machine. The machine (analogous to proteins) that
is constructed is determined by the construction program stored
on the memory tape (analogous to DNA) – it is a universal constructor comprising a universal Turing machine to store and
interpret information on the program tape and a robotic arm to
act on those instructions to build the phenotypic expression of
those genetic instructions. The universal constructor can construct any machine specified on its tape given the required raw
materials, energy and information. One such program is a selfspecification to construct a copy of itself – a self-replicating
machine (Freitas & Merkle 2004). To pass on this self-replication
capability, the tape must be copied into the offspring. Thus, the
instructions on the tape are used in two ways – first, it is read

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

and interpreted (and so executed) during construction (analogous
to biological translation) then it is read passively (uninterpreted)
during copying (analogous to biological transcription). A computer model of the von Neumann self-replicator has been simulated (Pesavento 1995). In biology, the process is more complex.
During transcription, the nucleotide base sequence of a strand
of DNA is transcribed onto messenger mRNA with the complementary sequence. During translation, mRNA is associated with
a ribosome (constructed from one large 50s and one small 30s
ribosomal rRNA and proteins) to map to the equivalent amino
acid sequences. The mRNA sequence is encoded into triplets,
usually beginning AUG and ending with stop codons UAG,
UAA or UGA. The mapping process is realized through tRNA
and aminoacyl-synthetases with tRNA acting as an adapter molecule between mRNA and an amino acid. There are at least 64 different types of tRNA and specific types of aminoacyl-synthetase.
mRNA is aligned with the ribosome to ensure that the ribosome
reads the mRNA codons.
Simplifications to von Neumann’s formulation exploit
sheathed loops where the instruction sequence structure is surrounded by a sheath to provide a path for signal propagation.
The sheathed loop was a modified Codd periodic emitter loop
which implemented a time-delay/memory function which formed
the basis of Codd’s 8-state self-replicator (Hutton 2009). Data
sequences circulating around the instruction loop would intercept
the origin of the constructing arm causing a copy to propagate
along the arm and causing it to extend or bend. If the data
sequence is a replication code, then the sheathed loop becomes
self-replicating with the arm printing a second loop that detaches
and replicates ad infinitum (Langton 1984). The Langton replicating sheathed loop of 86 active eight-state cells with 219 transition
rules allowed abandonment of universal construction. The
Langton loop is a pure self-replicator in which a closed loop transmits signals to perform the dual function of both interpreted and
uninterpreted instructions. Replacing the sheath around the
instruction loop with a growth cap at the tip of the constructing
arm retains simple self-reproducing structures of 32 active eightstate cells with 177 transition rules (Reggia et al. 1993). In fact,
even smaller self-replicating entities are permissible such as six
active eight-state cells with 91 transition rules and 12 active sixstate cells with 46 transition rules. Hence, universal construction
is sufficient but not necessary for self-replication. Such pure selfreplicators are not universal constructors and are highly simplified
(analogous to prions) but cannot be considered models of life. We
submit that universal construction is a universal feature of life.
The self-replicating machine concept – which reads its selfdescription – can be logically extended to a machine that can selfreplicate by self-inspection, i.e. examine itself to infer a complete
structural description of itself (Laing 1979). The key capability is
an active cellular string in sliding contact with another passive cellular string that accesses the passive string data. Hence, a universal
constructor can, by self-inspection, can construct a copy of itself.
This is biologically implausible as it represents a Lamarckian evolutionary process. However, the ability to self-inspect provides a
mechanism for self-repair with reference to pre-existing instructions. The Godel machine is a further extension which is a universal computing machine that can rewrite itself if a proof search
embedded in the initial algorithm can prove that the rewrite yields
rewards to a utility function, i.e. it is a learning algorithm that
interacts with its environment (Schmidhuber 2007). Learning
algorithms are premised on the notion that the future is a reflection of the past (as is evolution). In this way, such self-changes

9

through self-introspection (in essence, self-consciousness) allow
the system to step outside of itself thereby circumventing the limits of a closed arithmetic system. Self-reproduction by selfinspection rather than a stored program of instructions has
been demonstrated in the form of analogue control circuitry
(Suthakorn & Chirikjian 2006). Such circuitry is 2D in nature
so does not possess volume, thereby ensuring that the system is
completely observable. The system observed the configuration of
colour-coded electronic components serially using a phototransistor sensor mounted on a Cartesian gantry system. It selected a
copy of the currently observed component from a feeder. By serially observing the circuit components, component copies were
assembled in sequence until the entire circuit was replicated. Of
course, self-replication by self-inspection requires complete selfobservability, a condition that in general will not be valid.
Self-inspection illustrates that the logic of self-replication opens
up possibilities that go far beyond the strictures of life on Earth
and may be of interest to the astrobiological community.
Notwithstanding all this, von Neumann’s self-replicator is
more a self-assembling system rather than a self-replicating system as it involves assembling a series of parts or components to
construct a complete configuration. A recent example of such a
self-assembling system employed a set of cubes, each of which
was divided into two halves that could rotate relative to each
other in a diagonal plane (Zykov et al. 2005). Each face of the
cube was equipped with an electromagnet permitting cubes to
attach to each other. A tower of such cubes can pick up other
cubes in its environment to construct a copy of the tower, i.e. selfreplicate after a fashion. Self-assembling structures are widespread
in both chemistry and biology. Although molecular self-assembly
is ubiquitous in the biological world, we shall not consider it further here. The environment in reality constitutes a soil of raw
material rather than a sea of ready-made components. Practical
self-replication involves extracting and processing materials into
complete parts or components. An early example of this concept
for the terrestrial environment was the artificial living plant concept which was to absorb air, water and soil as raw materials using
solar energy to construct copies of itself (Moore 1956).
For our self-replicating machine, we are attempting to demonstrate 3D printing of electric motors (the basis of the constructing
arm) and electronic circuitry based on vacuum tubes (the basis of
the computer) as the fundamental components of a selfreplicating machine. These critical components will provide an
existence proof that a 3D printer-based self-replicating machine
can be constructed. We approach our self-replicating machine
through four major biological principles.
Biological Principle 1: materials closure
The first issue to consider is the materials and component inventory required to construct our self-replicating machine. Materials
(food) must be acquired from the environment – for an autotroph, this is inorganic material for both engineered and biological organisms. In the case of the Moon, the lunar regolith
must be transformed into elementary parts to be assembled into
the final product – this is in-situ resource utilization (ISRU).
Self-replicating machines on the Moon were proposed in an
early study (Freitas & Gilbreath 1980) and subsequently developed further but the latter were self-assembling concepts based
on Lego bricks (Chirikjian et al. 2002; Ellery 2016a,b,c). We
begin with a raw materials list for our self-replicating machine.
The materials ingested by the self-replicator are also the first

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

10

radical departure from the materials adopted in synthetic biology.
Engineering metals have high strength and stiffness (robust) –
commonly metals – while biological materials have low strength
and stiffness but high toughness and elasticity (adaptable) – commonly non-metallic elastomers – which is particularly useful for
mechanical energy storage (Ellery et al. 2004). Biological materials
are synthesized at moderate temperatures through the use of
catalysts while engineering materials are manufactured at high
temperature. An interesting question that emerges is ‘is life
restricted to low-temperature regimes?’ Enzymes are biological
catalysts that serve to increase the rate of biochemical reactions.
If organic material is the elan of life, then life will be restricted
to moderate temperature regimes. However, it is the chemical
reaction that constitutes metabolic function, the enzyme merely
facilitating it. If the logic of life is independent of its material substrate, then there is no reason why engineering materials cannot
provide the basis for life. There are some precedents for such a
notion.
Clays are non-organic minerals that provide surfaces and
cavities that constrain the formation of 3D conformation structures from simple precursors such as HCN, HCHO, etc. It has
been postulated that biological catalysts evolved from inorganic catalysts such as mineral surfaces (Cairns-Smith 1990).
Montmorillonite (Al4(Si4O10)2(OH)4.xH2O) clay may have acted
as one of the first organic catalysts in the origin of life through
the RNA world (Ferris 2005) and perhaps even prior to the
RNA world as the first medium of genetic information storage
(Cairns-Smith 1987). The clays montmorillonite and illite provide
catalytic mineral surfaces for the polymerization of 20–50 monomer-long oligomers of nucleotides and amino acids, respectively
(Ferris et al. 1996). Montmorillonite, in particular, can catalyse the
polymerization of oligopeptides and oligonucleotides (Schwartz
1996). Montmorillonite may have catalysed the synthesis of
RNA polymers of length greater than 40 bases in length as
required to act as both template and catalyst (Ferris et al. 2004).
Specific catalysts for polymerization and replication could be
implemented using clays within a protocell. The postulated
RNA world was probably preceded by inorganic replicators
such as crystal defects in clays, and mineral surfaces may
have provided key metabolic processes in a protocell (Wachtershauser 1990). Inorganic metabolism such as the iron–sulphur
world is consistent with hydrothermal vents with such protometabolism, possibly enhanced with hypercyclic feedback systems
(Szostak et al. 2016). If a catalyst (inorganic or organic) is replaced
or supplemented by higher thermal energy, the chemical reaction
is still hastened. Does this absolve it of its biological character? We
suggest not. Rather than CHONPS, we are adopting a minimal
suite of engineering materials that can implement all the functions required of a self-replicator in its environment – we focus
on the Moon for a number of reasons not relevant to this argument (Ellery 2016a,b,c). This approach brings to mind the
emphasis placed on physicochemical processes on the nature of
life (Schultze-Makuch & Irwin 2004). Our self-replicator must
extract its restricted set of feedstock materials – iron, silicon,
nickel, cobalt, tungsten, selenium, silica-based glass, silicone plastic (siloxanes) and water – from raw materials (mineral ores). The
restricted range of required materials must be able to implement
all the material functions required – compressive/tensile structures (bones/tendon), thermal insulation and conduction (fat/
bloodstream), electrical conduction and insulation (axons/myelin), switching logic (neurons), etc. – whilst minimizing the infrastructure required to extract it (Table 1).

A A Ellery

This materials inventory can be readily extracted from surface
lunar minerals and near-surface NiFe asteroid material on the
Moon. Over the aeons, solar wind has deposited volatiles at an
average rate of 3 × 108 particles cm−2 s−1 into the top few mm
of soil. However, impact gardening has impregnated this material
to a depth of a few metres. Solar wind comprises 96% H2 which
has accumulated into a regolith concentration of 20–200 ppm
(average ∼120 ppm) plus almost 4% He3 (with a He3/He4 ratio
of 3 × 10−4 by mass) plus many minor constituents including carbon compounds. The common lunar mineral ilmenite (FeTiO3)
in the 35–55 µm grain size range also preferentially adsorbs
these volatiles compared with other minerals with the degree of
volatile-enrichment increasing at finer grain sizes ∼10 µm.
Loosely bound volatiles may be thermally evolved from surface
regolith at temperatures of 600°C to release 75% of the volatile
inventory (this increases to 86% at 700°C, 95% at 800°C and
100% close to 1000°C). Although dominated by H2, additional
volatiles – SO2, CO/CO2/CH4, N2, F2, Cl2, etc. will be released.
Carbon in the form of CO, CO2 and CH4 volatiles is relatively
scarce compared with mineral resources with an average abundance of 120 ppm (Fegley & Swindle 1993). Fractional distillation
may be employed to separate the gas fractions due to their wellseparated condensation temperatures – He (4.2 K), H2 (20 K),
N2 (77 K), CO (81 K), CH4 (109 K), CO2 (194 K) and H2O
(373 K). The synthesis of silicone oils and silicone plastics
from syngas-derived from lunar volatiles is outlined in (Ellery
2016a,b,c). Silicones are chosen over hydrocarbons for their radiation hardness, high-temperature tolerance, functional properties
and economic consumption of carbon.
Heating the mineral ilmenite to ∼1000°C in the presence of H2
reduces it to pure Fe, TiO2 and H2O: FeTiO3 + H2 → Fe + TiO2 +
H2O. The water may be electrolysed to recycle the H2 and store
O2: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2. Iron forms the basis of our self-replicator’s
tissue but it requires the addition of further elements to provide a
range of alloys for different functions – Ni, Co, Si, W and Se. In
lunar regolith, Fe, Ni and Co particles are associated together as
5–60 µm inclusions in troilite of meteoritic origin (Wittmann &
Korotev 2013). However, it would be desirable to gain access to
these materials in more concentrated form. The cobalt content
of lunar and terrestrial mantles is similar. The Ni/Co ratio of
the Moon’s mantle and the Earth’s mantle are similar to that of
chondrites (Ringwood & Seifert 1986) (Table 2). This suggests
that the Moon’s abundance of Ni should be similar to that of
Earth’s mantle. However, Ni is depleted in the lunar mantle by
a factor of 3 suggesting a Ni-rich metal lunar core. This constitutes evidence that the Moon was derived from the Earth’s mantle
after the Earth’s core had formed. Nevertheless, lunar igneous
rock often contains high Ni (up to 56%) and Co (up to 9%) content in FeNi metal inclusions, especially olivines but sometimes
also in plagioclase. Lunar mantle olivine ((Mg,Fe)2SiO4) offers
the highest source of associated Ni and Co favouring the lunar
south pole Aitken basin where lunar mantle material may have
been excavated – however, the crater shallowness suggests that
no mantle material was in fact excavated (Wieczorek & Phillips
1999). The two chief question marks concern the availability of
tungsten which is a critical material for thermionic processes
and selenium for its photosensitive response. On the Earth, tungsten has an average concentration of 1–2 mg kg−1 and is typically
found as wolframite ((Fe,Mn)WO4) and scheelite (CaWO4). It is
enriched in several rock-forming minerals including igneous Fe–
Ti oxide minerals which can contain up to 10 mg kg−1 W. Its
availability on the Moon is limited.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

11

Table 1. Materials inventory required for a lunar photolithoautroph
Functionality

Traditional materials

Lunar substitutes

Tensile structures

Aluminium alloy, iron alloys (steel),
titanium alloy, plastic, composite
materials

Wrought iron, cast Iron, steel

General structures including vehicles

Compressive
structures

As above plus concrete/cement

As above

Buildings/fixed infrastructure

Elastic structures

Metal springs/flexures, Rubber

Iron alloy springs/flexures,
Silicone elastomers

Compliant structures

Thermal conductors

Aluminium, copper, heat pipes

Steel, fernico

Thermal straps, radiator surfaces

Thermal insulation

Glass (fibre), ceramic

Glass (fibre), ceramic

Thermal isolation

Thermal tolerance

Tungsten, tantalum

Tungsten

Vacuum tube electrodes, high-temperature
crucibles

Electrical
conduction

Aluminium, copper, nickel

Fernico (e.g. kovar), nickel

Electrical wiring, resistors, capacitors, inductor
coils, motor coils, electromagnet coils

Electrical insulation

Glass, ceramic, plastic, silicon steel

Glass, ceramic, silicone plastic
(to be minimized), silicon
steel

Vacuum tube enclosures, ceramic plates (motor
cores and capacitors), plastic sheathing,
electric motor cores

Active electronics

Solid state

Vacuum tubes (kovar, nickel,
tungsten, glass)

Computer architectures

Magnetic materials

Rare earth materials (permanent
magnets) Supermalloy

Silicon steel/laminate
(electromagnets) Permalloy

Magnetic flux generation (motors)
Magnetic shielding

Sensors and
sensory
transduction

PVDF/PZT
PN junction semiconductors

Quartz
Selenium
Thermionic conversion

RF oscillators, electricity generation, optical
vacuum tubes (photodiodes/
photomultipliers)

Optical structures

Polished aluminium
Glass

Polished nickel
Glass

Mirrors, lenses, optical fibres

Liquids

Hydrocarbon oils Water

Silicone oils
Water (to be minimized)

Lubricants, hydraulic force transmission
(e.g. hot isostatic pressing), coolant

Gases

Air – petrol/paraffin

Oxygen – hydrogen

Oxidant –propellant

Meteoritic material is the most likely material to contain
high concentrations of iron, nickel, cobalt and tungsten (Ellery
2016a,b,c). A NASA proposal to capture a small ∼1 m diameter
asteroid and re-direct it into lunar orbit offers a potential solution.
If a NiFe asteroid were to be selected, a ready source of Ni, Co, W
and Se would be available although it would require orbital access.
However, asteroidal material is available on the Moon itself.
The three largest terrestrial impact craters on Earth are the
250–300 km diameter Vredefort cater in South Africa (2.02 Gy
old), the 200 km diameter Sudbury crater in Canada (1.85 Gy
old), and the 170 km diameter Chicxulub crater in the Mexico
Yucatan (65 My old). Large terrestrial impact craters such as the
Vredefort South Africa and Sudbury Canada craters are sources
of gold–uranium and nickel–cobalt–platinum, respectively

Table 2. Ni and Co abundances in the lunar source material (ppm) [adapted
from Ringwood A & Seifert S (1986)]
Silicate

Ni

Co

Ni/Co

Lunar mantle olivine

890

156

5.7

Lunar volcanic glass

185

82

2.3

75

43

1.7

11 100

509

22

Average mare basalt
C1 carbonaceous chondrites

Applications

(Reimold et al. 2005). The Vredefort deposits were formed from
pre-existing archaean deposits prior to impact while the
Sudbury Ni–Cu sulphide deposits were formed by the impactor
itself. Most Sudbury ores are associated with a sublayer at the
base of a 2.5 km thick elliptical igneous lens 27 × 60 km2 in extent
with surrounding dikes. Large extraterrestrial impact craters
might be expected to yield similar metallic sources. Mascons are
high gravitational anomalies on the Moon which are believed to
be formed by impact excavation (Melosh et al. 2013; Montesi
2013). Mantle material slowly flowed into the basin causing uplift
of the basin as it cooled and contracted, increasing its density.
Hence, it is generally concluded that asteroid material of the
impactor was vaporized and either escaped into space or was diffused over the lunar surface to form the 1–2% of the meteoritic
material in the lunar regolith. However, it is possible that there
may be asteroidal ores located within 500 m of the lunar surface
if some of the asteroid material survived impact. Low-velocity
impacts of small meteorites up to 3 km s−1 permits partial survival of the impactor which will have accumulated over the
aeons (Bland et al. 2001). At high-impact angles, higher impact
velocities of 7 km s−1 permit the survival of impactor material
which remains localized at the centre of the resulting crater
(Bland et al. 2008). The fraction of surviving material is directly
related to the impact angle, however. Around 2.6% of lunar craters
will retain more than 50% of the impacting material – this correlates with at least 600 craters exceeding 10 km in diameter in the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

12

A A Ellery

highlands and 70 craters of similar dimensions in the mare
regions. Such craters may be identified by thin breccia lens thicknesses. These offer potential sources of asteroidal material on the
Moon. Strong magnetic anomalies in the northern rim of the
South Pole Aitken basin on the lunar farside indicate that they
originate from magnetic iron minerals of the impactor
(Wieczorek et al. 2012; Collins 2012). Most of the metallic core
of the 200 km diameter asteroid impactor which struck from
south to north at 15 km s−1 at a 45° angle was retained in downrange ejecta. In general, most projectile material from near vertical
impact velocities below 12 km s−1 appears to fragment but they
survive and concentrate into the central peak of the craters created
(Yue et al. 2013). The rest of the impactor material is dispersed in
ejecta blanket, the crater floor and rim. The olivine in many lunar
crater peaks is of asteroidal rather than lunar mantle origin.
Beyond 14 km s−1 impact speeds, however, vaporization of the
projectile material occurs. Metals appear to have the high survivability to hypervelocity impacts suggesting their incidence in crater floors, walls and ejecta blankets as metal particle fragments
(McDermott et al. 2016). This suggests that there will be significant near-surface regions of the Moon which will host high concentrations of NiFe material and its associated Co, W and Se
resources (Table 3).
Both iron and nickel are plentiful in NiFe meteoritic sources.
Cobalt is commonly found in association with Ni. If both are in
sulphide form with troilite, they can be reduced with hydrogen
by smelting at high temperature and pressure. Tungsten inclusions in NiFe meteoritic material represent one of the most
accessible sources of tungsten. Forging by hammer, press, rolling
or die is essential for tungsten. Tungsten has the highest melting
point of all metals at 3422°C. As a structural material, it may be
used for rocket engine linings but it is an essential ingredient in
vacuum tube cathodes. It is processed in the non-molten state
through powder metallurgy. Selenium is also a required resource
for its photosensitive character necessary in light sensors and
arrays of our engineered lifeform. Se/Te weight ratio of ∼20 is
approximately constant in stony meteorites while the Se abundance averages ∼25 ppm Si in both stony and carbonaceous
meteorites (Akafa 1966; Schuindewolf 1980). Meteoritic sources
are thus favoured for both elements W and Se.
There are material commonalities to our engineered creature
and biological organisms. Important elements for the LUCA

Table 3. Essential iron alloys
Iron alloy

Composition

Functionality

Wrought iron

100% Fe

Tensile structures

Cast iron

2–4% C + 1–2% Si + 94–
97% Fe

Compressive structures

Tool steel

9–18% W + <2% C + 80–
91% Fe

Durable cutting tools

Silicon steel

<3% Si + >97% Fe

Soft electromagnets (motor
cores and memory cores)

Kovar

29% Ni + 17% Co + 0.2% Si
+ <0.01% C + 53.5% Fe

Electrically conductive wire

Permalloy

80% Ni + 20% Fe

Magnetic shielding (μr ∼ 105)

Nanophase
iron

0

100% Fe

Ferrofluidic sealing

organism may have been Fe, Ni, Co and W metals (amongst
others such as Mn, Mo, Cu, Zn and V) at temperatures ∼100°C
under high pressure maintained by hydrothermal flow reactors
(Wachtershausen 2006). These materials bear many similarities
to our self-replicating machine’s materials, though the biological
temperature regimes are much more modest. Pioneer ligands
included S and S2 (sulphides) and others such as SH, H2O, OH,
CO and CN, many of which are available as volatiles in the
lunar regolith. Metal sulphides such as troilite/pyrite are common
in nickel-iron meteorite material. Iron has an important role in
ancient biochemical systems prior to oxygenation of the Earth’s
atmosphere. Early ecosystems on Earth were driven by the anaerobic cycling of H2 and Fe2+ by phototrophs (Canfield et al. 2006).
Banded iron formations from 3.8 By ago indicate Fe2+ was dissolved in ocean waters. Iron cycling occurred between Fe3O4
and Fe2+ in solution in a Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couple (Weber et al.
2006). Insoluble Fe3O4 is the electron acceptor that is produced
through anoxygenic photosynthesis with ferrous Fe2+ in solution
as the electron donor (Bird et al. 2011):
4Fe2+ + CO2 + 11H2 O  CH2 O + 4Fe(OH)3 + 8H+
Fe2+ is then recycled by iron-reducing bacteria. Mars has large
deposits of iron oxide for which the Tinto River Basin with its
iron-based geomicrobiology is an analogue (Amils et al. 2003).
Its acidic waters are enriched in ferric iron and sulphates supporting iron oxidizers and iron reducers. Pyrite FeS2 is common
under anaerobic conditions such as hydrothermal vents where it
is a constituent of chimneys. It is formed from hydrothermal
H2S and Fe2+ in solution: FeS + H2S → FeS2 + 2H+ + 2e−. Pyrite
offers a powerful chemoautotrophic energy source through the
oxidative formation of pyrite from troilite and hydrogen sulphide
(Wachtershauser 1990). Pyrite may also act as a reduction source
for catalysing the formation of iron–sulphur enzymes NAD(P)H
and FADH2 (Wachtershauser 1992). Anaerobic oxidation of
ferrous (FeII) to ferric (FeIII) iron by purple non-sulphur bacteria
may have preceded oxygenic photosynthesis during the Archaean
(Widdel et al. 1983). Pyrite minerals are commonly contaminated
by FeS, CoS2 and NiS2 and have a typical Se content of 0.05% but
may be enriched up to 0.9%. Finally, today, magnetotactic bacteria
synthesize magnetite crystals inside magnetosomes (Rawlings
et al. 2012). Hence, iron has an important role to play in biology.
Likewise, it has a central role in the metabolism and tissue of our
engineered creature.
The natural lunar glass is ubiquitous on the Moon – typically
20–25% of lunar regolith – caused by impact heating followed by
rapid quenching but it is not suitable for optical applications.
Fused quartz/silica is the best option though it is produced by
melting and shaping high-purity silica at 2000°C (compared
with ∼1000°C for soda lime glass). It has superior optical and
thermal properties compared with most other types of glass and
has a low thermal expansion coefficient (∼5.5 × 10−7/°C). This
makes fused silica suitable for lenses, polished mirrors, vacuum
tubes, glassware and other transparent optical components across
the IR–ultraviolet (UV) range. As well as glass, quartz is a piezoelectric material that may be deployed for displacement sensing
and derivative measurements (Kolesar & Dyson 1995). Silica
and its variant quartz are rare on the Moon due to the low
water content of the Moon. It can be manufactured by deposition
from silicates with the action of strong acids similar to natural
weathering. For example, acid leaching by hot hydrochloric acid

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

is a viable approach to reducing anorthite while avoiding high
temperatures:
CaAl2 Si2 O8 + 8HCl + 2H2 O  CaCl2 + 2AlCl3 .6H2 O + 2SiO2
There are plastic pre-ceramic resins that can be 3D printed as a
plastic gel into structures which are then fired into a hightemperature ceramic releasing much of its organic component
(Wogan 2016). These pre-ceramic polymers are composed of
mixtures of siloxanes and silazanes which are extruded. When
pyrolized in the presence of UV light, the two polymers cross-link
and form silicon oxycarbide ceramic structures. A simpler
approach is to employ silicone plastics as precursors to ceramics
without the need for silazanes (Narisawa 2010). There are two
options: silicone may be oxidized into silica or reduced to silicon
carbide. In all cases, it requires a post-processing thermal step following 3D printing. Silicon carbide may be created by heating silica and carbon at 2400°C for an extended period – this far in
excess of the temperatures required for metal extraction from
minerals. However, pyrolysis of silicone at 1100°C yields SiOxCy
which may be converted to silicon carbide by carbothermic reduction with excess C at 1800°C:
SiOx Cy  SiC + xCO + (y − x − 1)C
This imposes slightly more modest temperatures though the rarity
of carbon sources suggests SiC should be reserved for specialized
roles such as ball milling. Alternatively, silicone may be converted
to silica by flame combustion in oxygen:


SiOx Cy + 1 − x + 2y O2  SiO2 + yCO2
This would not have the hardiness of SiC but provides a mechanism for 3D printing ceramics without extreme temperatures. Silica
is commonly used in biological systems –diatom shells, phytoliths
in grasses, and spicules of sponges. Silicon has also been suggested
as a replacement for carbon through its redox reactions between
silica solid and silane (SiH4) gas. Such a silicon-based metabolism
would require quite extreme conditions and the solidity of silica
does present certain difficulties for its excretion.
Biomining is simpler and less energy-intensive than pyrometallurgy, offering a biological component to engineered selfreplication. Of particular relevance is the biooxidation of sulphide
deposits such as iron pyrite by Thiobacillus ferrooxidans in a cultured medium with ferrous iron as the energy source (Acevedo
2000; Cockell 2011). Synthetic biology may introduce additional
extraterrestrial applications such as enhanced biomining and biocement production, biological control systems (Menezes et al.
2015) and photosynthetic bacteria for capturing solar energy as
a biofuel (Way et al. 2011). However, biomining using microorganisms as catalysts are unlikely to be feasible for extraterrestrial
processing in the near term, especially on the Moon.

Biological Principle 2: solar energy for metabolism
Energy is essential for living entities to maintain their metabolic
activity and growth. Whereas photosynthesis in chloroplasts is
driven by pigment molecules which operate at moderate temperatures, the self-replicating machine autotroph uses thermal energy.
Thermosynthesis has been suggested as a plausible energy source
for extraterrestrial biota, though it was envisaged to apply to

13

low-temperature gradients within ices (Muller 2003). Such thermosynthesis would offer very low-quality energy but it is plausible
that much higher temperature gradients might occur at hydrothermal vents with temperatures of 400 + °C under high pressure.
Industrial temperatures offer even higher energy sources clearly
beyond the capacity for carbon-based biology.
To extract our feedstock for the 3D printers, an intense source
of thermal energy is required. Our self-replicator uses hearthbased chemistry to extract its restricted set of feedstocks materials.
The primary energy source is solar energy which is captured
and concentrated using solar concentrators – parabolic mirrors
or Fresnel lenses. Solar furnaces using Fresnel lenses can
provide the required temperatures for thermochemical extraction
from minerals. Fresnel lenses concentrate sunlight onto a single
focus – they are flat with a sculpted contour to reduce weight.
They have not been discovered by biological evolution almost certainly because the advantage of Fresnel lenses over biconics is
only apparent for much larger geometries than biological eyes.
The temperature regimes our creature requires for its metabolism
far exceed that of even Pyrolobus fumarii which like all terrestrial
organisms is restricted by the limits of carbon-based organics. A
silicon-based lifeform may not be so limited in temperature tolerance. The Fresnel lens-based thermal source allows us to create a
local controlled environment for the self-replication process to be
undertaken in a structured encapsulated environment to minimize variability in metabolic processes. This locally controlled
environment begins with using Fresnel lenses to thermally fuse
local lunar regolith at 1200–1500°C, thereby paving it into the
glass to control the incidence of dust. This is the first step towards
encapsulation.
Thermal energy can be converted into electrical energy
through thermionic emission (implemented in vacuum tubes)
(Ellery 2016a,b,c). This focusses light energy onto a small volume
as heat onto the cathode of a vacuum tube. The cathode emits
electric current through thermionic emission with an efficiency
of around 5–20%. This may be enhanced significantly through
PETE (photon-enhancement of thermionic emission) using
photosensitive coatings (such as Se) (Schwede et al. 2010).
Thus, electric power is generated to enable the growth of the selfreplicating machine. Both forms of energy – thermal and electrical – are required for our artificial creature’s metabolism.
Energy may be stored mechanically in motorized flywheels.
According to Boden (2003), the first fundamental law of bioenergetics requires that a living organism must convert environmental
energy into smaller energy currency units that can be tapped
incrementally to power metabolic activity. In biological systems,
it is ATP that provides this currency in discrete packages. In
our self-replicating machine, flywheel energy storage provides a
continuously tappable energy mechanism. It is not inconceivable
that the bacterial flagellar motor could have evolved and been
co-opted into a nanoscale-flywheel-type of organelle for storing
biological energy (without the flagellum itself). Multiple flywheels
in random orientations within the cell would sum to zero total
angular momentum. Furthermore, as conceived in spacecraft
(Varatharajoo 2004), flywheels could provide combined energy
storage and angular momentum control of cellular tumbling.
The same two components discussed later for actuation and information processing – motors and vacuum tubes respectively – provide the basis for energy generation and storage respectively for
our self-replicator. This multifunctional aspect of component
use is common in biology where a component evolved for one
task (such as feathers for thermal insulation) is co-opted for

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

14

another task (control surfaces for bird flight). Motors are the central component in flywheels (electromechanical batteries) which
offer high-energy densities. They provide the basis for all motive
machines including 3D printers, other manufacturing processes
and for energy storage (as flywheels); vacuum tubes provide the
basis for all active electronics and energy generation (through
thermionic conversion) (Ellery 2016d).
Biological Principle 3: manipulation of the environment
The feedstock to which our creature has access is fed to our ribosome which comprises a set of 3D printers for different material
types. In biological 3D protein construction, 1D polypeptide
strings are constructed from amino acid modules in a ribosomal
assembly line using tRNA coding keys. The origin of tRNA–
amino acid encoding is unknown, whether it is an arbitrary
frozen accident or due to a specific physicochemical interaction
(Edwards 1998). Coevolution theory suggests that the coding
scheme evolved from relative positioning of precursor amino
acids and tRNA on pyrite mineral surfaces. Polypeptide strings
automatically configure themselves into their appropriate 3D
shape. In our artificial creature, the construction process is not
an assembly line, rather a suite of 3D printers. The artificial 3D
structure is constructed from a series of modular 2D layers that
are built into their appropriate 3D shape layer-by-layer.
Furthermore, this 3D printed structure is employed in its entire
volume rather than localized to active regions of the surface of
a biological protein – this, of course, is a result of the difference
of scale between the macroscopic engineered structure and the
molecular biological structure. Our self-replicating machine is
based on a 3D printing concept inspired by the RepRap 3D
printer (Jones et al. 2011). RepRap is a partially self-replicating
3D printer that can print its own plastic parts (Fig. 1). It cannot,
however, replicate: (i) its steel bars; (ii) its connecting metal nuts
and bolts; (iii) its glass work platform; (iv) its electric motors;
(v) its electronics boards; (vi) nor can it self-assemble. Such additive manufacturing is well established for constructing structures
of different materials such as plastics (fused deposition

Fig. 1. Assembled RepRap 3D printer.

A A Ellery

modelling), metals (electron beam freeform fabrication) and ceramics (selective laser sintering). All 3D printing involves relative
motion between a printing head (xy-direction) and a work platform (z-direction). They are in effect Cartesian robots – all robots
from rovers to drills to manipulators are kinematic configurations
of electric motors. Hence, electric motors are central to our selfreplicating machine.
The key components of the self-replicating machine are
electric motors and electronics which can both be constructed
from the available material set we considered earlier. These components are the fundamental components of any kinematic
machine – 3D printers, manipulators, roving vehicles, drilling/
milling machines, lathes, etc. The core of any robot is its actuators, sensors and controllers. Actuation involves manipulating
the local environment – an essential pre-requisite of life. Our
own experiments using shape memory alloys as artificial muscles
driving a rotary shaft using cams illustrated the concept of an artificial linear bio-inspired motor but it was inferior in performance
to the electromagnetic motor (Ellery 2015). We have been applying 3D printing methods to the construction of DC electric
motors of different types. Although we have yet to 3D print an
entire electric motor, we have 3D printed motor cores and are
working in printing coils and electromagnets to complete the
assembly (Fig. 2). In our self-replicating machine, the nature of
the self/non-self-boundary is more fluid than in biological systems – its internal space is defined by its internal thermochemical
processing, 3D printing, etc. Its external space is less clear as it
must forage to acquire its nutrients for which it deploys rovers
to perform extractive processes – they effectively extend ‘pseudopodia’ into the environment. The goal is to demonstrate 3D printing of electric motors and electronic control systems as the basic
components of any kinematic machine. We thus next consider
information-processing control systems.
Biological Principle 4: information processing
It has been proposed that the Turing machine does not constitute
a general model of computing (Goldin & Wegner 2005). Natural
computation is a physical process that cannot be fully described
by a Turing machine (MacLennan 2004). Hence, there are physical machines that cannot be simulated by any Turing machine.
The Turing machine model cannot account for interactivity
with the environment of the real world because it is abstract
rather than physical. Interacting computational units have emergent properties that are not algorithmic. A special Turing machine
concept relevant to biological information processing is the

Fig. 2. Polylactic acid (PLA)-based 3D printed motor core with 45% iron powder
loading.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

interactive Turing machine. Biological organisms interact with
their environment allowing for perpetual learning and so possess
super-Turing capabilities (Wierdermann & van Leeuwen 2002).
This concept may be abstracted as the interactive Turing machine
with advice. Interactive Turing machines have perpetual exchange
of information with their environment – essentially infinite computations. This models any cognitive system equipped with sensors to acquire information from the environment and effectors
with which to modify that environment. This process is ongoing
and continuous. This capacity by itself however, lies within the
power of the universal Turing machine through its input/output
tapes. The key to introducing super-Turing capabilities lies with
the admission of unpredictability to its computations. This is
introduced to the Turing machine as advice to implement noncomputable external information. The advice takes the form of
a separate advice tape that computes the advice value on its
tape in a single step. The Turing machine with advice models
computability with interaction with the external environment.
The advice tape models inputs from a social community of interactive Turing machines – the advice is non-computable within the
Turing machine itself. Hence, the interactive Turing machine with
advice constitutes a super-Turing machine. A corollary of this
suggests that the physical version of the Church-Turing thesis
(every finite physical process subject to physical laws can be simulated by a universal Turing machine operating a finite program)
(Deutsch 1985) is incorrect and that biological neural function
cannot be implemented by a universal Turing machine.
Our interest in feedback control systems is reminiscent of
a cybernetic definition of life emphasizing multiple feedback
control systems as a major characteristic (Korzeniewski 2001).
We need to 3D print computational control systems for those
motors, i.e. electronics. The vacuum tube – constructed from
our restricted suite of materials in a relatively simple geometric
configuration – should lend itself to 3D printing (TBD). A typical
triode has a simple construction comprising a heated tungsten
cathode surrounded by a nickel control grid and a nickel anode
enclosed in a glass tube. The control grid voltage controls the current between the cathode and anode. It provides the basis for electronic amplification and switching (Han & Meyyappan 2014).
Solid state electronics requires too many specialized reagents
and conditions to be incorporated into a practical self-replication
scheme. The vacuum tube may potentially supersede solid-state
transistors for unconventional applications as they have a high
tolerance to temperature and radiation (Teuscher 2014). Selfreplication technology is one such unconventional application.

15

In fact, vacuum channel transistors are under development in
which a thin layer of SiO2 insulates a gate electrode from the
upper source and drain electrodes (Han & Meyyappan (2014)).
The cathode and anode are sharpened into points to intensify
the electric field at the tips emitted via field emission. The distance between the cathode and anode is less than the electron
mean free path (200 nm in the air or 1 µm in He) – in a vacuum,
this is not a constraint. However, the bulky nature of traditional
vacuum tubes does not lend itself to traditional general purpose
computational architectures.
Digital computations require many more devices than analogue circuits for the same function – the addition of two numbers requires hundreds of transistors. It requires Boolean
circuits of size O(n 1+e) to compute multiplications with an
error e > 0. For this reason, we adopt neural network architectures
over traditional computer architectures to compensate for the larger size of vacuum tubes over solid-state transistors. The complexity of a neural network increases only as the logarithm of the task
complexity unlike the exponential increase in circuit complexity
of digital architectures. Similarly, to train a neural network of N
nodes and W weights,
m random training samples are required

such that m ≥ O We log Ne where 0 < e ≤ 1, e = acceptable error
fraction (Baum & Haussler 1989). Neural net circuits can incorporate vacuum tubes rather than difficult-to-manufacture solid
state circuitry but without the scaling problem of digital circuitry.
To that end, we have adopted a simple analogue neuron circuit as
our computing element modified from the Yamashita–Nakaruma
neuron (Yamashita &Nakamura 2007; Larson & Ellery 2015)
(Fig. 3).
The electronic neuron models the nonlinear input–output
relation where the output is given by:

yi = f

n



wij xi

j=0

where xi = input, wij = weighting factor, f(.) = non-linear squashing function. The weight matrix of the network of neurons determines the functionality of the network. Simple reactive behaviours
have been implemented readily using these analogue neurons.
Braitenburg vehicles comprise two sensors, left and right, and
two motors to drive their respective wheels, left and right. The
connections between the sensors and the motors determine the
vehicle’s behaviour. We have demonstrated a two-neuron circuit
implementing a Braitenburg control architecture of BV2/BV3

Fig. 3. Analogue neuron circuit – part of a two-neuron circuit for rover obstacle avoidance behaviour.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

16

class (Braitenburg 1984) performing automatic obstacle avoidance
on a simple desktop mobile robot.
Artificial neural networks can implement any nonlinear
mapping function and are Turing-complete (Siegelmann &
Sontag 1995) perhaps even offering super-Turing capabilities
(Siegelmann 1995). Neural nets are efficient as universal Turing
machines. Recurrent neural nets with feedback are more powerful
than standard feedforward neural nets (Goudreau et al. 1994). A
neural network simulator with r = m + n + 2 layers of neurons and
two sets of recurrent connection weights with feedback can simulate in real time a Turing machine with m-symbols and n-states
(Sun et al. 1991). The Siegelmann–Sontag universal neural
network-based Turing machine comprised 886 neurons, though
this has been reduced in more recent work to 96 then 25 and
finally to just 9 switched affine neurons that implement Boolean
functions (Siegelmann & Margenstern 1999). A recurrent neural
network with rational weights is computationally equivalent to a
Turing machine model of digital computing machines. The computational capacity of recurrent neural networks may be enhanced
beyond that of the Turing machine using real-valued weights
which offer the infinite precision of analogue information
(Balcazar et al. 1997). This allows them to compute non-recursive
functions. The recurrent neural network with real weights offers
super-Turing capabilities as an interactive Turing machine
with advice (Cabessa & Siegelmann 2012). Hence, neurons with
rational weights yield Turing machine capability but neurons
with real weights are more powerful than Turing machines
(Margenstein 2000). Analogue recurrent neural networks are
equivalent to oracle Turing machines. An oracle machine is a
black box augmenting a Turing machine that makes a decision
in a single step even if that decision is complex. The Turing
machine can copy symbols onto the oracle tape. The oracle is
not a Turing machine itself. The oracle itself has its own tape
and read/write head but has special states – Query and
Response. When the machine reads the Query state, the read/
write head subsequently moves to the next square and writes
the Response (yes/no) as a solution in a single step. State Yes
or No depends on whether the current string is on the oracle
tape. The oracle introduces the possibility of inputting new nondeterministic or non-computable data to the machine. An
example of a decision is the halting problem where the oracle
determines whether the Turing machine halts given its inputs,
i.e. the oracle augments the Turing machine with non-computable
capabilities. As a physical adjunct circuit, the Wheatstone bridge
can act as an oracle to a Turing machine extending the computational powers of such a system beyond the Church-Turing limit
(Beggs et al. 2010). It is the measurement of a physical process –
in this case, measurement of analogue electrical resistance by
the Wheatstone bridge – that extends the computational power
of the abstract Turing machine. We select the analogue neural
network (to which feedback connections can be added) as the
computational architecture of choice yielding greater computational capabilities over traditional computational architectures.
Evolving recurrent neural networks where synaptic weights
change over time (i.e. learning) are equivalent to interactive
Turing machines with advice, i.e. they are capable of superTuring computations – this is the case for both rational and
real weights (Cabessa 2014). In rational-weighted recurrent neural
networks, these super-Turing capabilities can only be realized if
the synaptic weights evolve in a non-recursive manner – recursive
learning limits such networks to Turing-computable functions.
However, in real-weighted recurrent neural networks, there are

A A Ellery

no such requirements for the learning to achieve super-Turing
capacities. Super-Turing machines include analogue recurrent
neural networks with real-valued nonlinear squashing functions
(Teuscher & Sipper 2002). Hence, our analogue neuron may
offer super-Turing capabilities when in recurrent configuration.
These circuits – based on vacuum tube active components – are
to be 3D printed. The core of our universal Turing machine segment is a 3D printer which takes data stored in magnetic core
memory (based on the same technology as motors) and prints
out analogue neural net circuits that physically encapsulate programs. It is envisaged that such neural network circuits implement specific programs printed by a 3D printer (representing
the read–write head of a universal Turing machine) according
to information held in magnetic core memory (based on the
same principles and materials as an electric motor). Embedded
software interacts with its underlying hardware and is subject to
temporal constraints on execution time, this constraint being
undecidable for Turing machines (Lee 2005). The analogue neural
net is an extreme version of the embedded software in that the
software is embedded in the connection weights without the temporal undecidability problem. Although the analogue neuron is
far simpler than the biological neuron, it nevertheless implements
basic functions of information processing and transmission.
Noise can be exploited to advantage – dithering is the process
of imposing random mechanical vibrations onto motors to compensate for sticking behaviour. This is an example of stochastic
resonance (Wiesenfeld & Moss 1995). Similarly, biological neurons, by virtue of their nonlinearity, can exploit stochastic resonance to enhance the detectability of small signals by amplifying
the combined signal and noise to overcome the threshold for
detection. The noise signal from broadband background entrains
and resonates with the low signal to amplify it. Stochastic resonance requires low levels of noise otherwise excessive noise will
swamp it – the signal-to-noise ratio rises with noise to an optimal
value and then decreases. Analogue neurons are characterized by
constant low levels of intrinsic noise but above a threshold they
fire digitally, thereby amplifying a low signal. Networks of neurons provide the ability to handle signals with a range of amplitudes and noise levels. Hence, analogue neural circuits offer the
prospect of exploiting stochastic resonance for enhanced signal
processing.
Biological and analogue neural systems go beyond Turing
machines because they are self-modifying and computationally
open so cannot be captured in an algorithm. This is precisely
the realm of autonomic computing which emphasizes selfconfiguration, self-optimization, self-repair and self-protection
(Kephart & Chess 2003). Hence, our adoption of analogue recurrent neural networks offers similar computational capabilities as
biological systems.

Discussion & conclusions
Our self-replicating machine concept possesses all the primary
elements of life. We have outlined how the elements of a selfreplicating machine might be constructed physically and how
some fundamental components might be 3D printed. We are
using robotics as existence proofs for physical mechanisms of selfreplication – a similar approach of using robotics in the service
of biological sciences has been cognitive robotics and robotic
zoology. The steps towards realization of a self-replicating
machine are thus:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology

(i) 3D printing basic control system elements – actuators and
electronic circuits – from raw material – this is the most critical step which is underway;
(ii) 3D printing general robotic systems (essentially protein analogues) – mining vehicles, drills, crusher jaws, etc. –as different configurations of motors and their control systems;
(iii) 3D printing 3D printers as Cartesian robot configurations of
motors and their control systems (essentially ribosome
analogues);
(iv) There have been several attempts to build embryonic but
simple self-replication architectures from Lego to exploit its
standard blocks and mechanical interfacing (Chirikjian
et al. 2002; Moses et al. 2014) but none consider the complexities of raw material acquisition and processing (essentially cellular networks);
(v) Encoding a self-replicating machine into a heritable program
of instructions (essentially genes) to be stored in magnetic
core memory (including error detection and correction
codes);
(vi) Demonstrate magnetic memory-to-memory program copying through magnetic induction (similar to the two sides
of a transformer).
So, can building an artificial robotic lifeform using engineering
materials provide any insight into the astrobiology quest – to
understand the limits and scope of life beyond the Earth? It is
worth noting that our artificial creature possesses most of the
properties of life. There are open questions however, whether
this self-replicating machine could be alive. In the digital ecosystems Tierra and Avida, populations of self-replicating programs
compete for computer memory space and CPU time forming
their computational ecosystems (Adami 2006). The code itself
corresponds to genetic information while their execution implements the phenotypic function. Instruction processing correlates
to energy consumption and varies in proportion to code length.
Replication is imperfect while population pressure imposes environmental constraints. Fitness is determined by the copying efficiency and replication rate. Replication is subject to mutation
and faster replicators tend to have more offspring (r strategy)
but new phenotypic traits increase fitness (K-strategy). Limited
environments cause evolutionary regression but co-evolutionary
arms races imposed by continually changing environments overcome this (Red Queen effect). Evolvability however, requires a
balance between exploration (plasticity) and exploitation (stability). Experiments in Avida indicate that self-replication does not
guarantee evolvability (LaBar et al. 2015). Within Avida, a lack
of evolvability can occur if all possible mutations to a specific genetic sequence prevent further self-replication, but this would be
rare. Autopoietic definitions of life appear to deny the possibility
of engineered life as they emphasize process rather than components and, in doing so, they impose evolutionary history as a
requirement for life. A minimal Mycoplasma genitalium cell has
been engineered to survive with only 265 genes without loss of
biological function from its natural 475 genes (it is the smallest
natural genome because it lacks genes for cytochrome c and the
Krebs cycle) – it did not evolve this state, so by this definition,
it is not alive, yet this is clearly not the case. The original precursor organism with its evolved cellular components – many of
which were retained in the minimal organism – was alive.
Hence, we submit that evolutionary capacity rather than evolutionary history is a property of life. This implies that the selfreplicating machine we have described would be alive in a

17

potential sense. If permitted to evolve, it would constitute life; if
prevented from evolving, it would not. An important question
then becomes whether the machine is too brittle for evolutionary
change – this will be dependent on the architecture of its genetic
program of instructions. We envisage that the engineered system
will not use phylogenetic, ontogenetic and epigenetic representation schemes though these have been explored in engineered systems (Sipper et al. 1997) and indeed, 3D printing provides a
mechanism to implement ontogenesis in self-replicating structures. This is an issue for the future. The question to the astrobiology community is whether this quest to create a self-replicating
machine yields any insights into astrobiology questions.

References
Acevedo F (2000) Use of reactors in biomining processes. Electronic Journal of
Biotechnology 3(3).
Adami C (2006) Digital genetics: unravelling the genetic basis of evolution.
Nature Genetics 7, 109–118.
Akafa H (1966) Abundances of selenium, tellurium and indium in meteorites.
Journal of Geophysical Research 71(7), 1919–1923.
Amils R, Fernandez-Remolar D, Gomez F, Aguilera A, Gonzalez-Toril E,
Rodriguez N (2003) ‘Importance of the iron cycle relevance to Mars exploration’. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Workshop on Exo-Astrobiology –
Mars: The Search for Life (ESA SP-545), Madrid, Spain, 43–46.
Asai D and Koonce M (2001) Dynein heavy chain: structure, mechanics and
evolution. Trends in Cell Biology 11(5), 196–202.
Atsum T (2001) Ultrasonic motor model for bacterial flagellar motors. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 213, 31–51.
Baas P, Karabay A and Qiang L (2005) Microtubules cut and run. Trends in
Cell Biology 15(10), 518–524.
Balcazar J, Gavalda R and Siegelmann H (1997) Computational power of
neural networks: a characterization in terms of Kolmogorov complexity.
IEEE Transaction of Information Theory 43(4), 1175–1183.
Baum E and Haussler D (1989) What size net gives valid generalization?
Journal of Neural Computation 1(1), 151–160.
Bedau M (1992) Philosophical aspects of artificial life. In Varela F
and Bourgine P (eds). Towards A Practice of Autonomous Systems.
Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press, pp. 494–503.
Bedau M (1997) Emergent models of supple dynamics in life and mind. Brain
& Cognition 34, 5–27.
Bedau M (1998) Four puzzles about life. Artificial Life 4, 125–140.
Bedau M (2003) Artificial life: organisation, adaptation and complexity from
the bottom up. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(11), 505–512.
Bedau M, McCaskill J, Packard N, Rasmussen S, Adami C, Green D,
Ikegami T, Kaneko K and Ray T (2000) Open problems in artificial life.
Artificial Life 6, 363–376.
Beggs E, Costa J and Tucker J (2010) Physical oracles: the Turing machine
and the Wheatstone bridge. Studia Logica 94, 1–22.
Ben-Jacobs E (2009) Learning from bacteria about natural information processing. Annals of New York Academy of Sciences 1178, 78–90.
Benner S and Sismour M (2005) Synthetic biology. Nature Reviews Genetics 6,
533–543.
Berg H (1974) Dynamic properties of bacterial flagellar motors. Nature 249, 77–79.
Berg H (1995) Torque generation by the flagellar rotary motor. Biophysical
Journal 68, 163s–167s.
Berg H (2003) Rotary motor of bacterial flagella. Annual Reviews Biochemistry
72, 19–54.
Bersini H (2010) Software replica of minimal living processes. Origins of Life
& Evolution of Biospheres 40, 121–130.
Bich L and Damiano L (2007) Theoretical and artificial construction of the
living: redefining the approach from an autopoietic point of view. Origins
of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 34, 459–464.
Bird L, Bonnefoy V and Newman D (2011) Bioenergetic challenges of microbial iron metabolism. Trends in Microbiology 19(7), 33–340.
Blair D (1991) Bacterial rotary motor. Nanotechnology 2, 123–133.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

18
Blair D (1995) How bacteria sense and swim. Annual Reviews Microbiology
49, 489–522.
Bland P, Cintala M, Horz F and Cressey G (2001) Survivability of meteorite
projectriles – results from impact experiments. In 32nd Lunar & Planetary
Science Conference, abstract no 1764.
Bland P, Artemieva N, Collins G, Bottke W, Bussey D and Joy K (2008)
Asteroids on the Moon: projectile survival during low velocity impacts. In
39th Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, abstract no 2045.
Bloom B (1995) Microbial minimalist. Nature 378, 236.
Boden M (2003) Alien life: how would we know? International Journal of
Astrobiology 2(2), 121–129.
Bourgine P and Stewart J (2004) Autopoiesis and cognition. Artificial Life 10,
327–345.
Brack A and Trouble M (2010) Defining life: connecting robotics and chemistry. Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 40, 131–136.
Braitenburg V (1984) Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brizard A and van Esch J (2009) Self-assembly approaches for the construction of cell architectures mimics. Soft Matter 5, 1320–1327.
Bruylants G, Bartik K and Reisse J (2010) Is it useful to have a clear-cut definition of life? On the use of fuzzy logic in prebiotic chemistry. Origins of
Life & Evolution of Biospheres 40, 137–143.
Burgess S and Knight P (2004) Is the dynein motor a winch? Current Opinion
in Structural Biology 14, 138–146.
Cabessa J and Villa A (2014) Interactive evolving recurrent neural networks
are super-Turing. In Wermter S, Weber C, Duch W, Honkela T,
Koprinkova-Hristova P, Magg S, Palm G, Villa A (eds). Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 8681. Cham: Springer Publishers, pp. 57–64.
Cabessa J and Siegelmann H (2012) Computational power of interactive
recurrent neural networks. Neural Computation 24(4), 996–1019.
Cairns-Smith A (1987) Genetic Takeover & the Mineral Origins of Life.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cairns-Smith A (1990) Seven Clues to the Origin of Life. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Calabretta R (1998) Cellular automata in an artificial life perspective. In
Bandini S, Serra R and Suggi Liverani F (eds). Cellular Automata:
Research Towards Industry. London: Springer-Verlag, pp. 243–246.
Canfield D, Rosing M and Bjerrum C (2006) Early anaerobic metabolisms.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 361, 1819–1836.
Carter F (1984) Molcular device computer: point of departure for large scale
cellular automata. Physica 10D, 175–194.
Chaitin G (1970) To a mathematical definition of ‘life’. ACM SICACT News 4,
12–18.
Chirikjian G, Zhou Y and Suthakorn J (2002) Self-replicating robots for lunar
development. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 7(4), 462–472.
Chodasewicz K (2014) Evolution, reproduction and definition of life. Theory
Biosciences 133, 39–45.
Cockell C (2011) Synthetic geomicrobiology: engineering microbe-mineral
interactions for space exploration and settlement. International Journal of
Astrobiology 10(4), 315–324.
Cohen P and Perrault C (1979) Elements of a plan-based theory of speech
acts. Cognitive Science 3(3), 177–212.
Collins G (2012) Moonstruck magnetism. Science 335, 1176–1177.
Cordova N, Ermentrout B and Oster G (1992) Dynamics of single-motor
molecules: the thermal ratchet model. Proceedings of the National
Academy Sciences of the United States of America 89, 339–343.
Cronin L, et al. (2006) Imitation game – a computational chemical approach
to recognising life. Nature Biotechnology 24(10), 1203–1206.
Cross R (2004) Kinetic mechanism of kinesin. Trends in Biochemical Sciences
29(6), 301–309.
Cross R and Carter N (2000) Molecular motors. Current Biology 10(5), R177–
R179.
Crutchfield J (1994) Calculi of emergence: computation, dynamics and induction. Physica D 75(1–3), 11–54.
Csanyi V and Kampus G (1985) Autogenesis: the evolution of replicative systems. Journal of Theoretical Biology 114, 303–321.
Cui S and Friedman A (1999) Analysis of a mathematical model of protocell.
Journal of Mathematical Analysis & Applications 236, 171–206.

A A Ellery
Damiano L and Luigi Luisi P (2010) Towards an autopoietic redefinition of
life. Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 40, 145–149.
Deamer D and Pashley R (1989) Amphiphilic components of the Murchison
carbonaceous chondrite: surface properties and membrane formation.
Origins of Life & Evolution of the Biosphere 19, 21–38.
Deamer D, Dworkin J, Sandford S, Bernstein M and Allamandola L (2002)
First cell membranes. Astrobiology 2(2), 371–381.
Deming T (1997) Polypeptide materials: new synthetic methods and applications. Advanced Materials 9(4), 299–311.
Deplazes A and Huppenbauer M (2009) Synthetic organisms and living
machines. Systems & Synthetic Biology 3, 55–63.
DeRosier D (1998) Turn of the screw: the bacterial flagellar motor. Cell 93,
17–20.
Deutsch D (1985) Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal quantum computer. Proceedings of The Royal Society A 400, 97–117.
Dohner K, Nagel C-H and Sodeik B (2005) Viral stop-and-go along microtubules: taking a ride with dynein and kinesin. Trends in Microbiology 13
(7), 320–327.
Dutcher S (1995) Flagellar assembly in two hundred and fifty easy-to-follow
steps. Trends in Genetics 11(10), 398–404.
Edwards M (1998) From a soup or a seed? Pyritic metabolic complexes in the
origin of life. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 13(5), 178–181.
Egelman E (2003) Actin’s prokaryotic homologs. Current Opinion in
Structural Biology 13, 244–248.
Eiben A (2014) Grand challenges for evolutionary robotics. Frontiers in
Robotics & AI 1(Jun), 1–8.
Elani Y, Law R and Ces O (2014) Vesicle-based artificial cells as chemical
microreactors with spatially segregated reaction pathways. Nature
Communications 5, 5305.
Ellery A (2015) Ultimate smart system – steps towards a self-replicating machine.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Smart Materials &
Structures, pp. 225–234.
Ellery A (2016a) Are self-replicating machines feasible? AIAA J Spacecraft &
Rockets 53(2), 317–327.
Ellery A (2016b) How to build a self-replicating machine on the Moon. In
Proceedings of the ASCE Earth & Space Conference, Orlando, pp. 713–724.
Ellery A (2016c) Solar power satellites for clean energy enabled through disruptive technologies. In Proceedings of the 23rd World Energy Congress
(Award Winning Papers), Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 133–147.
Ellery A (2016d) John von Neumann’s self-replicating machine – critical components required. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Systems Man & Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary, pp. 314–319.
Ellery A et al. (2004) Bionics & Space Systems Design 1 – Overview of
Biomimetics Technology. ESA-ESTEC Technical Note 1, ESA Contract no
18203/04/NL/PA.
Endy D (2005) Foundations for engineering biology. Nature 438, 449–453.
Engelborghs Y (1994) Microtubules: dissipative structures formed by selfassembly. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 9, 685–689.
Ermentrout B and Edelatein-Keshet L (1993) Cellular automata approaches
to biological modelling. Journal of Theoretical Biology 160, 97–133.
Fegley B and Swindle T (1993) Lunar volatiles: implications for lunar resource
utilization. In Lewis J, Matthews M and Gurrieri M (eds). Resources of Near
Earth Space. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, pp. 367–426.
Ferris H and Minamino T (2006) Flipping the switch: bringing order to flagellar assembly. Trends in Microbiology 14(12), 519–526.
Ferris J (2005) Mineral catalysis and prebiotic synthesis: montmorillonitecatalysed formation of RNA. Elements 1, 145–149.
Ferris J, Hill A, Liu R and Orgel L (1996) Synthesis of long prebiotic oligomers on mineral surfaces. Nature 381, 59–61.
Ferris J, Joshi P, Wang K-J, Miyakawa S and Huang W (2004) Catalysis in
prebiotic chemistry: application to the synthesis of RNA oligomers.
Advances in Space Research 33, 100–105.
Fleischaker G (1989) Autopoiesis: the status of its system logic. BioSystems 22,
37–49.
Fontana W and Buss L (1994) Arrival of the fittest: toward a theory of biological organisation. Bull Mathematical Biology 56(1), 1–64.
Forterre P (2010) Defining life: the virus viewpoint. Origins of Life &
Evolution of Biospheres 40, 151–160.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology
Freitas R & Gilbreath W (1980) Advanced Automation for Space Missions. In
Proceedings of the 1980 NASA/ASEE Summer Study, NASA CP-2255, Santa
Clara, CA.
Freitas R & Merkle R (2004) Kinematic Self-Replicating Machines. Austin TX:
Landes Bioscience.
Frixione E (2000) Recurring views on the structure and function of the cytoskeleton: a 300 year epic. Cell Motility & the Cytoskeleton 46, 73–94.
Froese T and Stewart J (2010) Life after Ashby: ultrastability and the autopoietic foundations of biological autonomy. Cybernetics & Human Knowing
17(4), 7–50.
Gabora L (2006) Self-other organisation: why early life did not evolve through
natural selection. Journal of Theoretical Biology 241, 443–450.
Gerdes K, Meller-Jensen J, Ebersbach G, Kruse T and Nordstrom K (2004)
Bacterial mitotic machineries. Cell 116, 359–366.
Gibbs W (2004) Synthetic life. Scientific American 290(5), 74–81.
Goldin D and Wegner P (2005) Church-Turing thesis: breaking the myth. In
Cooper S, Lowe B and Torenvliet L (eds) Lecture Notes in Computer Science
vol. 3526. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, pp. 152–168.
Goldstein L (2001) Molecular motors: from one motor many tails to one
motor many tails. Trends in Cell Biology 11(12), 477–482.
Goudreau M, Giles L, Chakradhar S and Chen D (1994) First order vs
second order single layer recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks 5(3), 511–513.
Han J-W and Meyyappan M (2014) Device made of nothing: the vacuum
transistor could one day replace silicon. IEEE Spectrum (Jul), 31–35.
Hanczyc M (2011) Metabolism and motility in prebiotic structures.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366, 2885–2893.
Hess H and Vogel V (2001) Molecular shuttles based on motor proteins:
active transport in synthetic environments. Reviews in Molecular
Biotechnology 82, 67–85.
Hordijk W (2013) Autocatalytic sets: from the origin of life to the economy.
Bioscience 63(11), 877–881.
Howard J, Hudspeth A and Vale R (1989) Movement of microtubules by single kinesin molecules. Nature 342, 154–158.
Huitorel P (1988) From cilia and flagella to intracellular motility and back
again: a review of a few aspects of microtubule-based motility. Biology of
the Cell 63, 249–258.
Hutton T (2002) Evolvable self-replicating molecules in an artificial chemistry.
Artificial Life 8(4), 341–356.
Hutton T (2009) Codd’s self-replicating computer. Artificial Life 16(2),
99–117.
Huxley A (2000) Mechanics and models of the myosin motor. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 355, 433–440.
Huxley H (1996) Personal view of muscle and motility mechanisms. Annual
Review of Physiology 58, 1–19.
Itoh H, Takahashi A, Adachi K, Noji H, Yasuda R, Yoshida M and
Kinosita K (2004) Mechanically driven ATP synthesis by F1-ATPase.
Nature 427, 465–468.
Jacobson H (1959) Informational content of mechanisms and circuits.
Information & Control 2, 285–296.
Jones R, Haufe P, Sells E, Iravani P, Olliver V, Palmer C and Bowyer A
(2011) Reprap – the replicating rapid prototyper. Robotica 29(Jan),
177–191.
Jorgensen S and Fath B (2004) Application of thermodynamic principles in
ecology. Ecological Complexity 1, 267–280.
Karcher R, Deacon S and Gelfand V (2002) Motor-cargo interactions: the key
to transport specificity. Trends in Cell Biology 12(1), 21–27.
Karplus M and Gao Y (2004) Biomolecular motors: the F1-ATPase paradigm.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 14, 250–259.
Kephart J and Chess D (2003) Vision of autonomic computing. IEEE
Computer 36(1), 41–58.
Kinosita K, Yasuda R, Noji H, Ishiwata S and Yoshida M (1998) F1-ATPase:
a rotary motor made of a single molecule. Cell 93, 21–24.
Klavins E (2004) Universal self-replication using graph grammars. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on MEMS, NANO and Smart
Systems, Banff, Canada, paper no. 1508947.
Kolesar E and Dyson C (1995) Object imaging with a piezoelectric robotic
tactile sensor. IEEE Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 4(2), 87–96.

19
Koonce M and Samso M (2004) Of rings and levers: the dynein motor comes
of age. Trends in Cell Biology 14(11), 612–619.
Korzeniewski B (2001) Cybernetic formulation of the definition of life.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 209, 275–286.
Koshland D (2002) Seven pillars of life. Science 295, 2215–2216.
Kull J, Sablin E, Lau R, Fletterick R and Vale R (1996) Crystal structure of
the kinesin motor domain reveals a structural similarity to myosin. Nature
380, 550–555.
Kwok R (2010) Five hard truths for synthetic biology. Nature 463, 288–290.
LaBar T, Adami C and Hintze A (2015) Does self-replication imply evolvability? In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Artificial Life,
pp. 596–602.
Lahoz-Beltra R (1997) Molecular automata assembly: principles and simulation of bacterial membrane construction. BioSystems 44, 209–229.
Laing R (1975) Some alternative reproductive strategies in artificial molecular
machines. Journal of Theoretical Biology 54, 63–84.
Laing R (1979) Machines as organisms: an exploration of the relevance of
recent results. BioSystems 11, 201–215.
Langton C (1984) Self-reproduction in cellular automata. Physica D 10,
135–144.
Larson S & Ellery A (2015) Trainable analogue neural network with application to lunar in-situ resource utilisation. In Proceedings of the International
Astronautics Federation Congress, Jerusalem, IAC-15-D3.3.6.
Lazcano A (2010) Which way to life? Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres
40, 161–167.
Lee E (2005) Building unreliable systems out of reliable components: the real
time story. Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences University of
California Berkeley Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2005–5.
Letelier J, Marin G and Mpoodoziz J (2003) Autopoietic and (M, R) systems.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 222, 261–272.
Luigi Luisi P (2003) Autopoiesis: a review and a reappraisal. Naturwissenschaften
90, 49–59.
Luigi Luisi P and Varela F (1989) Self-replicating micelles – a chemical version of a minimal autopoietic system. Origins of Life & Evolution of the
Biosphere 19, 633–643.
Luisi P (1998) About various definitions of life. Origins of Life & Evolution of
Biospheres 28, 613–622.
Machery E (2012) Why I stopped worrying about the definition of life … and
why you should as well. Synthese 185(1), 145–164.
MacLennan B (2004) Natural computation and non-Turing models of computation. Theoretical Computer Science 317, 115–145.
MacNab R (2003) How bacteria assemble flagella. Annual Reviews of
Microbiology 57, 77–100.
Mandelkow E and Mandelkow E-M (2002) Kinesin motors and disease.
Trends in Cell Biology 12(12), 585–590.
Margenstein M (2000) Frontier between decidability and undecidability: a
survey. Theoretical Computer Science 231, 217–251.
Martin W and Russell M (2003) On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the
evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic
prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 358, 59–83.
Maturana H (1975) Organisation of the living: a theory of the living organisation. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 7, 313–332.
McDaniel R and Weiss R (2005) Advances in synthetic biology: on the
path from prototypes to applications. Current Opinion in Biotechnology
16, 476–485.
McDermott K, Price M, Cole M and Burchell M (2016) Survivability of copper projectuiles during hypervelocity impacts in porous ice: a laboratory
investigation of the survivability of projectiles impacting comets or other
bodies. Icarus 268, 102–117.
McMullin B (2004) Thirty years of computational autopoiesus: a review.
Artificial Life 10, 277–295.
McMullin B & Varela F (1997) Rediscovering computational autopoiesis. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Life, paper no.
97-02-012.
Melosh H, Freed A, Johnson B, Blair D, Andrews-Hanna J, Neumann G,
Phillips R, Smith D, Solomon S, Wieczorek M and Zuber M (2013)
Origin of lunar mascon basins. Science 340, 1552–1555.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

20
Menezes A, Montague M, Cumbers J, Hogan J and Arkin A (2015) Grand
challenges in space synthetic biology. Journal of the Royal Society Interface
12, 20150803.
Miki H, Okada Y and Hirokawa N (2005) Analysis of the kinesin superfamily:
insights into structure and function. Trends in Cell Biology 15(10), 467–476.
Mitchell M (1998) Computation in cellular automata: a selected review. In
Gramss T, Bornholdt S, Gross M and Mitchell M (eds). Nonstandard
Computation. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers, pp. 95–140.
Montesi L (2013) Solving the mascon mystery. Science 340, 1535–1536.
Moore E (1956) Artificial Living Plants. Scientific American, 195(4), 118–126.
Moreno Bergareche A and Ruiz-Mirazo K (1999) Metabolism and the problem of its universalisation. BioSystems 49, 45–61.
Morowitz H, Heinz B and Deamer D (1988) Chemical logic of a minimum
protocell. Origins of Life & Evolution of the Biosphere 18, 281–287.
Moses M, Ma H, Wolfe K and Chirikjian G (2014) An architecture for universal
construction via modular robotic components. Robotics & Autonomous
Systems 62(7), 945–965.
Mozafari R (2005) Liposomes: an overview of manufacturing techniques.
Cellular & Molecular Biology Letters 10, 711–719.
Muller A (2003) Finding extraterrestrial organisms living on thermosynthesis.
Astrobiology 3(3), 555–564.
Narisawa M (2010) Silicone resin applications for precursors and composites.
Materials 3, 3518–3586.
Oakley B (2000) Abundance of tubulins. Trends in Cell Biology 10(Dec),
537–542.
Ochman H, Lawrence J and Groisman E (2000) Lateral gene transfer and the
nature of bacterial innovation. Nature 405, 299–304.
Oro J, Kimball A, Fritz R and Master F (1959) Amino acid synthesis from
formaldehyde and hydroxylamine. Archives of Biochemistry & Biophysics
86, 115–130.
Oster G and Wang H (2003) Rotary protein motors. Trends in Cell Biology 13
(3), 114–121.
Paun C (2000) Computing with membranes. J Computer & System Sciences 61,
108–143.
Pesavento U (1995) Implementation of von Neumann’s self-reproducing
machine. Artificial Life 2(4), 337–354.
Pinto J, Gladstone G and Yung Y (1980) Photochemical production of formaldehyde in Earth’s primitive atmosphere. Science 210, 183–185.
Pohorille A and Deamer D (2002) Artificial cells: prospects for biotechnology.
Trends in Biotechnology 20(3), 123–128.
Pross A (2005a) Stability in chemistry and biology: life as a kinetic state of
matter. Pure Applied Chemistry 77(11), 1905–1921.
Pross A (2005b) On the emergence of biological complexity: life as a kinetic
state of matter. Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 35, 151–166.
Pross A (2008) How can a chemical system act purposefully? Bridging between
life and non-life. Journal of Physical Organic Chemistry 21, 724–730.
Pross A and Pascal R (2013) Origin of life: what we know, what we can know
and what we will never know. Open Biology 3, 120190.
Rasmussen S, Chen L, Nilsson M and Abe S (2003) Bridging nonliving and
living matter. Artificial Life 9(3), 269–316.
Rasmussen S, Chen L, Deamer D, Krakauer D, Packard N, Stadler P and
Bedau M (2004) Transitions from nonliving to living matter. Science 303,
963–965.
Rawlings A, Bramble J and Staniland S (2012) Innovation through imitation:
biomimetic, bioninspired and biokleptic research. Soft Matter 8, 6675–6679.
Reggia J, Armentrout S, Chou H-H and Peg Y (1993) Simple systems exhibiting self-directed replication. Science 259, 1282–1286.
Reimold W, Koeberl C, Gibson R and Dressler B (2005) Economic mineral
deposits in impact structures: a review. In Koebert C and Henkel H (eds).
Impact Tectonics. Impact Studies, vol. 6. Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 479–548.
Ringwood A & Seifert S (1986) Nickel-cobalt abundance systematics and their
bearing on lunar origin. In Proceedings of the Origins of the Moon
Conference, pp. 249–278.
Ruiz-Mirazo K, Pereto J and Moreno A (2004) Universal definition of life:
autonomy and open-ended evolution. Origins of Life & Evolution of
Biospheres 34, 232–346.
Saunders P and Ho M (1976) On the increase in complexity in evolution.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 63, 375–394.

A A Ellery
Schark M (2012) Synthetic biology and the distinction between organisms and
machines. Environmental Values 21, 19–41.
Schmidhuber J (2007) Godel machines: fully self-referential optimal universal
self-improvers. In Goertzel B and Pennachin C (eds). Artificial General
Intelligence. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 199–226.
Schneider E and Kay J (1994) Life as a manifestation of the second law of
thermodynamics. Mathematical & Computer Modelling 19(6–8), 25–48.
Schuindewolf U (1980) Selenium and tellurium content of stony meteorites by
neutron activation. Geochimica et Cosmochimica 19, 134–136.
Schultze-Makuch D and Irwin L (2004) Life in the Universe: expectations and
constraints. In Springer Advances in Astrobiology & Biogeophysics. Berlin,
Germany: Springer Publishers.
Schulze-Makuch D and Irwin L (2008) Life in the Universe: Expectations and
Constraints. Berlin, Germany: Springer Publishers.
Schuster S and Khan S (1994) Bacterial flagellar motor. Annual Reviews
Biophysics & Biomolecular Structure 23, 509–539.
Schwartz A (1996) Did minerals perform prebiotic combinatorial chemistry?
Chemistry & Biology 3, 515–518.
Schwede J, Bargstin I, Riley D, Hardin B, Rosenthal S, Sun Y, Schmitt F,
Pianetta P, Howe R, Shen Z-X and Melosh N (2010) Photon-enhanced
thermionic emission for solar concentrator systems. Nature Materials 9,
762–767.
Schwegler H and Tarumi K (1986) Protocell: a mathematical model of selfmaintenance. BioSystems 19, 307–315.
Senior A and Wise J (1983) Proton-ATPase of bacteria and mitochondria.
Journal of Membrane Biology 73, 105–124.
Siegelmann H. (1995) Computation beyond the Turing limit. Science 268,
545–458.
Siegelmann H and Margenstern M (1999) Nine switch-affine neurons suffice
for Turing universality. Neural Networks 12, 593–600.
Siegelmann H and Sontag E. (1995) On the computational power of neural
nets. Journal of Computer & System Sciences 50, 132–150.
Sipper M, Sanchez E, Mange D, Tomassini M, Perez-Uribe A and
Stauffer A (1997) ‘Phylogenetic, ontogenetic, and epigenetic view of bioinspired hardware systems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computations 1(1), 83–97.
Sismour M and Benner S (2005) Synthetic biology. Expert Opinion on
Biological Therapy 5(11), 1409–1424.
Skulachev V (2001) Mitochondrial filaments and clusters as intracellular
power-transmitting cables. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 26(1), 23–29.
Soong R, Bachand G, Neves H, Olkhovets A, Craighead H and
Montemagno C (2000) Powering a inorganic nanodevice with a biomolecular motor. Science 290, 1555–1558.
Stahlberg A, Schuster S, Bauer M, Baueurlein E, Zhao R, Reese T and
Khan S (1995) Conserved machinery of the bacterial flagellar motor.
Biophysical Journal 58(Apr), 168s–172s
Stepney S (2012) Programming unconventional computers: dynamics, development, self-reference. Entropy 14, 1939–1952.
Sun G-Z, Chen H-H, Lee Y-C and Giles C (1991) Turing equivalence of
neural networks with second order connection weights. In Proceedings of
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 2, pp. 357–362.
Suthakorn J and Chirikjian G (2006) Toward self-replication of robot control
circuitry by self-inspection In Ang M and Khatib O (eds). Environmental
Robotics IX. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 303–309.
Svoboda K and Block S (1994) Force and velocity measured for single kinesin
molecules. Cell 77, 773–784.
Szostak J (2012) Attempts to define life do not help to understand the origin
of life. Journal of Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics 29(4), 599–600.
Szostak J, Bartel D and Luigi Luisi P (2001) Synthesising life. Nature 409,
387–390.
Szostak N, Wasik S, Blazewicz J (2016) Hypercycle. PLoS Computational
Biology 12(4), e1004853.
Tabony J, Pochon N and Papaseit C (2001) Microtubule self-organisation
depends upon gravity. Advances in Space Research 28(4), 529–535.
Taylor E (2001) Cell as molecular machine. Molecular Biology of the Cell 12(2),
251–254.
Teuscher C (2014) Unconventional computing catechism. Frontiers in
Robotics & AI 1(Nov), 10.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology
Teuscher C and Sipper M (2002) Hypercomputation’ - hype or computation?
Communications of the ACM 45(8), 23–24.
Thomas N, Bardy S and Jarrell K (2001) Archaeal flagellum: a different
kind of prokaryotic motility structure. FEMS Microbiology Review 25,
147–174.
Tucker J and Zilinskas R (2006) Promise and perils of synthetic biology. New
Atlantis (Spring), 25–45.
Turing A (1937) On computable numbers with an application to the entschedungsproblem. Proceedings of London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 42,
230–265.
Tuszynski J, Trpisova B, Sept D and Sataric M (1997) Enigma of microtubules and their self-organising behaviour in the cytoskeleton. BioSystems
42, 153–175.
Tyreman M and Molloy J (2003) Molecular motors: nature’s nanomachines.
IEE Proceedings, Nanobiotecnology 150(3), 95–102.
Tyson J and Mackey M (2001) Molecular, metabolic and genetic control: an
introduction. Chaos 11(1), 81–83.
Ulanowicz R and Hannon B (1987) Life and the production of entropy.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B 232, 181–192.
Umerez J (2010) Artificial life: prospects of a synthetic biology. In Angelo L
and Queiroz J (eds). Advances in Modelling Adaptive & Cognitive
Systems. Brazil: UEFS Open Publishing, pp. 4–16.
Vale R (1999) Millenial musings on molecular motors. Trends in Biochemical
Science 24(12), M38–M41.
Vale R (2003) Molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport. Cell 112,
467–480.
Vale R and Milligan R (2000) The way things move: looking under the hood
of molecular motor proteins. Science 288, 88–95.
Vallee R and Stehman S (2005) How dynein helps the cell find its centre: a
servomechanical model. Trends in Cell Biology 15(6), 288–294.
van den Ent F, Amos L and Lowe J (2001a) Prokaryotic origin of the actin
cytoskeleton. Nature 413, 39–44.
van den Ent F, Amos L and Lowe J (2001b) Bacterial ancestry of actin and
tubulin. Current Opinion in Microbiology 4, 634–638.
Varatharajoo R (2004) Combined energy and attitude control system for small
satellites. Acta Astronautica 54, 701–712.
Varela F, Maturana H and Uribe R (1974) Autopoiesis: the organisation of
living systems, its characterisation and a model. BioSystems 5, 187–196.
von Neumann J & Burks A (eds) (1966) Theory of Self-Reproducing
Automata. IL: University of Illinois Press.
Wachtershausen G (2006) From volcanic origins of chemoautotrophic life to
bacteria, archaea and eukarya. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 361, 1787–1808.
Wachtershauser G (1990) Case for the chemoautotrophic origin of life in
an iron-sulphur world. Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 20, 173–
176.
Wachtershauser G (1992) Groundworks for evolutionary biochemistry: the
iron-sulphur world. Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 58, 85–201.
Wang H and Oster G (1998) Energy transduction in the F1 motor of ATP synthase. Nature 396, 279–282.
Way J, Silver P and Howard R (2011) Sun-driven microbial synthesis of chemicals in space. International Journal of Astrobiology 10(4), 359–364.
Weber J (2007) ATP synthase – the structure of the stator stalk. Trends in
Biochemical Sciences 32(2), 53–56.
Weber B (2010) What is life? Defining life in the context of emergent complexity. Origins of Life & Evolution of Biospheres 40, 221–229.
Weber K, Achenbach L and Coates J (2006) Microbes pumping iron: anaerobic microbial iron oxidation and reduction. Nature Reviews Microbiology 4,
752–764.
Wemmer K and Marshall W (2004) Flagellar mobility: all pull together.
General Biology 14, R992–R993.
Widdel F, Schnell S, Easing S, Ehrenreich A, Assmus B and Schink B (1983)
Ferrous iron oxidation by anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria. Nature 362,
834–838.
Wieczorek M and Phillips R (1999) Lunar multiring basins and the cratering
process. Icarus 139, 246–259.
Wieczorek M, Weiss B and Steart S (2012) Impactor origin for lunar magnetic anomalies. Science 335, 1212–1215.

21
Wierdermann J and van Leeuwen J (2002) Emergent computational potential
of evolving artificial living systems. Journal of AI Communications 15(4),
205–215.
Wiesenfeld K and Moss F (1995) Stochastic resonance and the benefits of
noise: from ice ages to crayfish and SQUIDS. Nature 373, 33–36.
Wittmann A and Korotev R (2013) Iron-nickel-(cobalt) metal in lunar rocks
revisited. In 44th Lunar & Planetary Science Conference, abstract no 3035.
Woese C (1998) Universal ancestor. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 95, 6854–6859.
Wogan T (2016) Ceramics made stronger with 3D printing. Chemistry World,
11 January 2016.
Wolfram S (1985) Undecidability and intractability in theoretical physics.
Physical Review Letters 54(8), 735–738.
Wolfram S (2002) A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media.
Yamashita Y and Nakamura Y. (2007) Neuron circuit model with smooth
nonlinear output function. In Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Nonlinear Theory & its Applications, Vancouver, pp. 11–14.
Yildiz A and Selvin P (2005) Kinesin: walking, crawling or sliding along?
Trends in Cell Biology 15(2), 112–120.
Yue Z, Johnson B, Monton D, Melosh H, Di K, Hu W and Liu Y (2013)
Projectile remains in central peaks of lunar impact craters. Nature
Geoscience 6, 435–437.
Zakeri B and Carr P (2015) Limits of synthetic biology. Trends in
Biotechnology 33(2), 57–58.
Zuravlev Y and Avetisov V (2006) Definition of life in the context of its origins. Biogeosciences 3, 281–291.
Zykov V, Mytilinaios E, Adams B and Lipson H (2005) Self-reproducing
machines. Nature 435, 163–164.

Appendix: Biological motors
We briefly review biological molecular motors because motors figure centrally
in our engineered life approach. They are commonly implicit in definitions of
life through the property of motion. Biological motive capability may be very
ancient – it has been suggested that internal chemistry (such as HCN hydrolysis) in proto-cells might have induced internal stresses thereby generating
physical movement, i.e. motility (Hanczyc 2011). All molecular motors generate mechanical forces using intermolecular chemical binding energy either
through a power stroke or a Brownian ratchet to exploit random thermal fluctuations. All biological linear motors operate through sliding along filaments.
There are three protein motors that act as rotary engines – the bacterial flagellar motor and F0 and F1 motors of ATP synthase (Oster & Wang 2003). All
these biological rotary motors are based on torqueing a load shaft. We consider only the main biological molecular motors but others exist. For example,
gene expression begins with RNA polymerase (RNAP) sliding along DNA in
search of the promoter. RNAP then binds to the promoter to initiate DNA
transcription.
ATP powered molecular motors include kinesin and dynein which actuate
cytoskeletal fibres of tubulin (microtubules), and myosin which actuates cytoskeletal fibres of actin (microfilaments) (Tyreman & Molloy 2003). All these
motors comprise of a force-generating head (N-terminal) connected by a
neck to a cargo-carrying tail (C-terminal). Both myosin and kinesin operate
through the Brownian ratchet. ATP synthase (ATPase) catalyses the reversible
formation of ATP from the nucleotide ADP and a P group by releasing energy.
ATPase is ubiquitous in the biological world as the universal form of energy
currency. It occurs in mitochondria, chloroplasts and bacteria (Senior &
Wise 1983). ATPase is the smallest biomolecular motor at ∼10 nm in size
and comprises two major parts organized as a rotor and stator assembly
(Karplus & Gao 2004; Wang & Oster 1998): (i) a hydrophobic (insoluble)
membrane segment F0 for proton movement, and (ii) a hydrophilic (soluble)
F1 segment for ATP hydrolysis and synthesis. ATPase’s two opposing rotary
units are connected in series on a common shaft. The shaft comprises a coiled
coil of γ subunits. The F1 motor drives the shaft clockwise (powered by ATP)
while the F0 motor drives it anticlockwise (powered by proton gradients).
F1-ATPase comprises three α-subunits and three β-subunits alternately forming a segmented ring (F1) surrounding an α-coiled γ-subunit forming the shaft
(stator). The F0 motor comprises a cylinder of 10–14 subunits (rotor). It can

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

22
act as a proton pump. The stator stalk links αβ and F0, though it varies structurally in its mitochondrial, chloroplast and bacterial forms (Weber 2007). The
foot of the γ-subunit connects to the ring of F0 unit. Rotary motion of the
γ-subunit of the F1-ATPase motor is energized by the hydrolysis of ATP
with water (Itoh et al. 2004). Proton flow through F0 rotates the γ unit clockwise to synthesize ATP while hydrolysis of ATP rotates it anticlockwise and
reverses the proton flow. β-subunits are fixed into a αβ-stator ring which
pushes the γ-subunit to rotate. It rotates through 120o steps and generates a
torque of 40–80 pN.nm with near 100% efficiency (almost fully reversible)
because it converts chemical energy into elastic strain energy of the αβ stator
rather than acting as a heat engine. F1 could be unrolled to form a linear motor
so that the αβ-subunits crawl along the γ-subunits (Kinosita K et al. 1998).
Artificial control of ATP concentration as the fuel supply effects control
over the movement speed of ATPase molecular motors such as kinesin and
myosin in synthetic devices (Hess & Vogel 2001). F1-ATPase has been integrated with an engineered nano-propeller to demonstrate the rotation of the
mechanical nano-propeller energized by ATP (Soong et al. 2000).
Flagella are widespread in archaea and bacteria indicating its early evolution. The flagellum probably evolved from an ancestor core flagellum of
around 20 proteins – motor, rod, hook, filament and protein-export machinery. All major archaea possess flagella – halophiles, methanogens, thermophiles and hyperthermophiles. Furthermore, the archaeal flagellum is very
different to the bacterial flagellum such that there are no genetic homologues
of bacterial flagellar genes in archaea (Thomas et al. (2001)). This suggests an
independent evolution in the early prokaryotic kingdoms, though this picture
is complicated by lateral gene transfer (Ochman et al. 2000). Archaeal flagella
are very thin ∼10 nm in diameter but operate similarly to bacterial flagella
with runs alternating with tumbles. Morphologically, archaeal flagella incorporate the hook feature but lack the rings of bacterial flagella being anchored
into cell walls rather than cell membranes.
The bacterial flagellum is morphologically similar to engineered DC electric motors though they are electrostatic with their torque output balanced by
viscous drag, both properties resulting from its small size (Berg 1974). Without
torque, the flagellum would halt within under 10−6 revolutions due to this viscosity. The flagellum control system including chemoreceptors is specified by
around 50 genes while the bacterial flagellum itself is constructed from 20 proteins and synthesized and controlled by 40 of those genes. The bacterial flagellar motor, powered by proton gradients, includes 8 stator segments, each
consisting of 4 MotA and two MotB subunits – MotA conducts protons
through the C-ring of the rotor while MotB anchors MotA to the cell wall.
The bacterial flagellum is driven by a rotary motor at the base of the flagellum
powered by a flow of protons across the bacterial membrane – it is an electrostatic motor. It rotates rather than flexes like eukaryotic flagella – anticlockwise
rotation generates thrust while clockwise motion causes tumbling in response
to attractor gradients. Escherichia coli have a set of four flagellar clusters
around their cell bodies. The chemoreceptors are clustered into a ‘nose’ at
the poles of the cell. When activated, a conformation change is transmitted
through the membrane to the flagellar motors. The bacterial flagellum is composed of a basal motor embedded in the cell wall, the hook and the filament.
The bacterial flagellum comprises a 45 nm diameter rotary motor that drives
the base of a 10 µm long, rigid helical propeller of ∼20 nm diameter with a
2 µm pitch. The propeller is connected to a flexible hook by two junction proteins. The hook is a universal joint so the propeller can rotate around multiple
axes. The outer L (lipopolysaccharide) and P (peptidoglycan) rings act as
bushings for the propeller shaft through the outer cell membrane but neither
contribute to torque generation. The 25 µm thick inner MS (membranous/
supermembranous) ring is the bushing attached to the inner cell membrane.
The MS ring is central to the flagellar structure, assembly and operation and
is one of several rings around 20 nm in diameter with a rotating rod inside.
Attached to the rod is the hook linked to the 5–15 µ long filament – it is related
to the type III secretion system (T3SSs) complex embedded in Salmonella that
transports toxins from inside the cell into needle-like structures on the outside
to inject poisons into its victim. Within the cell cytoplasm is the 45 µm thick C
ring. Around the flagellar motor between the MS and C rings is a ring of ten
studs. Flagellar proteins are hydrophobic (Blair 1991; Berg 2003) comprising
the flagellum assembly – FlgE (hook), FlgB, FlgC, FlgF and FlgG (shaft) and
FliC proteins (flagellum). FlgH and FlgI proteins form the L and P rings
respectively. FliG, FliM and FliN are cytoplasmic proteins that form the

A A Ellery
bistable switch complex for torque generation and switching between clockwise and anticlockwise directions. FliN is part of the C (cytoplasmic) ring
and stabilizes the switch structure; FliM is part of the C ring and involved
in switching control of the rotation direction of the flagellum (protein
CheY-P switches clockwise rotation otherwise rotation is anticlockwise); FliF
is the structural core of the MS ring (stator); FliG is part of the MS ring
and is involved in torque generation and switching; the C and MS rings
form part of the rotor. The two Mot proteins (MotA and MotB) are part of
the ten studs (stator) and together anchor and drive the motor, transport protons through the membrane and position the torque generators (Stahlberg
et al. 1995). Phosphorylation of the CheY protein (supplemented by other
Che proteins) induced by chemoreceptors changes the switching probability
through bonding to FliM. The flagellar motor spins at rates that depend on
the proton flux ∼10–100 Hz with a torque of ∼10−18 Nm. Assuming a rotor
radius of 20 nm, the flagellum generates a force of ∼20 pN at speeds of
∼1 µm s−1 (Berg 1995). During self-assembly, the flagellum is constructed
from the inside out beginning with the shaft, followed by the hook then the
flagellar filament (Ferris & Minamino 2006). It is reckoned that flagella, like
myosin, dynein and kinesin operate as thermal ratchets driven by thermal
fluctuations (Cordova et al. 1992). In the latter linear molecular motors,
cross-bridges fluctuate about equilibrium positions against an elastic
restoring force with ATP hydrolysis (Maxwell’s Demon) imposing unidirectionality to the random movements. This means that molecular conformation
switching is absent in biological molecular motors as chemical conformation
switching in developing molecular electronic devices has been considered
attractive (Carter 1984). A hierarchical regulation process is based on two
assemblies – shaft-hook and flagellar filament. The sub-assemblies are: the
basal body that transmits torque from the motor to the hook; the flagellar
motor comprises a stator and rotor; the switch determines the rotary direction;
the hook functions as a universal joint; the flagellar filament acts as a propeller;
finally, a series of assembly proteins (MacNab, (2003). A molecular automata
model of bacterial flagellar self-assembly was based on the affinity between
binding sites as a similarity metric quantified by the Hamming distance
(Lahoz-Beltra 1997).
The bacterial flagellum differs fundamentally from the eukaryotic flagellum (DeRosier, (1998). The eukaryotic flagellum is ∼20–100 µm long and
is based on dynein motors which bend and step along microtubular tracks
as sliding filaments (Dutcher 1995). The nine parallel microtubule fibres forming the sheath of the flagellum is hollow occupied by two central microtubules.
Between the core and sheath microtubules are many inner and outer dynein
arms which link the microtubules together and ratchet up and down. The
dynein motors are synchronized through entrainment of coupled oscillators
(Wemmer & Marshall 2004). The compliant tail undulates like a snake to generate movement powered by ATP. Eukaryotic cilia ∼2–15 µm long are also
constructed from dynein motors along microtubules powered by ATP but
beat in oar-like movements. Cilia function by relative sliding of outer pairs
of microtubules linked at their proximal end to a basal structure by connecting
proteins (Huitorel 1988). By contrast, the bacterial flagellum is powered by an
electromotive gradient of protons through the cell membrane. Torque is generated through electrostatic interaction between a ring of proton-binding sites
on the rotor and transmembrane protons (Schuster & Khan 1994). A fixed
number of protons correlate to a single revolution so proton flow generates
stepper motor behaviour. It has been postulated however that cyclic conformation changes generate travelling waves through elastic behaviour of the C ring
(Atsum 2001). Unlike eukaryotic flagella, bacterial flagella can rotate in either
direction. They can reach rotation rates up to 100–200 Hz at a constant torque
of ∼4500 pN/nm generating speeds of ∼50 µm s−1 much faster than myosin or
dynein biological motors.
In eukaryotic cells, molecular motors transport molecules and organelles
along cytoskeletal tracks. The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is a dynamic system
that provides structural integrity to the cell and rapidly re-organizes itself.
Microtubules are the primary cytoskeletal systems in the eukaryotic cell and
provide the basis for cellular events like mitosis through the mitotic spindle
assembly. Microtubules move cargo along long distances while actin is used
for local transport of cargo. Microtubules also form the basis of centrioles,
cilia, flagella, pseudopodia, phagocytosis, growth and morphogenetic development. Microtubules form through dynamic self-assembly of tubulin proteins
powered by the hydrolysis of GTP (Engelborghs 1994; Tuszynski et al.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

International Journal of Astrobiology
1997). Microtubules spontaneously self-organize based on reaction–diffusion
process of dissipative structures at far from equilibrium conditions. This selforganization process appears to require gravity (Tabony et al. 2001). Tubulin
proteins – α- and β-tubulins (sharing 40% amino acid identity) – provides the
basis of microtubules while γ-tubulin (sharing 30% amino acid identity with
α- and β-tubulins) is associated with anchorage at the centrosome and mitotic
spindle formation in eukaryotes (Oakley 2000). Microtubules are hollow tubes
comprised 9–18 protofilaments of similar but non-identical α- and β-tubulin
dimers (8 nm long by 25 nm diameter) forming a helical lattice: for 13 protofilaments, they run parallel to the long axis of the microtubule; for less than
or greater than 13 protofilaments, they are twisted around each other.
Microtubules reconfigure themselves through cutting of long immobile microtubules by enzymes katanin and spastin to convert them into short mobile microtubules which move into new configurations (Baas et al. 2005). Microtubules
function as linear tracks along which motor proteins (kinesin and dynein) travel
for long-range cargo transport. Kinesins move towards the fast-growing (plus)
end of the microtubule while dyneins move towards the slow-growing (minus)
end. Microtubules also form the mitotic spindle that separates chromosomes.
Viruses as obligate parasites appropriate host kinesin and dynein motors to propel themselves along microtubules (Dohner et al. 2005).
Most molecular motors have one or more heads-on-a-stalk configuration
with the head binding to a track and the stalk or tail binding to cargo either
directly or indirectly (Cross & Carter 2000). They operate by cyclically stepping
along the track be it circular or linear through conformation changes driven by
ATP metabolism – myosins along actin and kinesins and dyneins along microtubules (Karcher et al. 2002). Both kinesins and myosins have a head (attaching to the actin or microtubule filament) that undergoes a conformation
change on hydrolysis. This is amplified by the lever arm connecting the
head to the tail. The affinity of the head to the filament determines attachment
or detachment. Kinesin and myosin V are processive and remain attached with
at least one head while myosin II is non-processive and detaches after the
power stroke. Processivity permits continuous movement. Filaments of actin
form tracks for myosin motors for local transport of cargo molecules. Actin
filaments comprise two thin strands of polymer that are twisted around
each other which in turn, are crosslinked to rigidize the structure. Myosins
are actin-based molecular motors comprising one or two heavy chains, each
connected to between one and six light chains. The motor head binds to
actin powered by ATP hydrolysis which causes a myosin conformation change
(power stroke). The motor head on the myosin thick filament forms elastic
cross-bridges with the actin thin filaments. Myosins move along these actin
filaments – myosin II and myosin V move in the direction of the barbed
end. Myosin is 160 nm in length incorporating a 140 nm α-coiled tail and
two 20 nm long heads which catalyse ATP hydrolysis and bind with actin.
Thick filament myosin is energized by ATP hydrolysis and the release of phosphate to move cargo along tracks of thin filament actin which forms a local
network. The myosin motor has multiple functions – muscle contraction,
cytokinesis, endocytosis, cell shape, vesicle transport and signal pathways.
Myosin comprises a catalytic core the binds nucleotide to actin linked to an
80 Å lever arm which rotates to move along the actin filament (power stroke).
Each working stroke is powered by a single ATPase cycle. Myosin moves 100 Å
displacement per ATP hydrolysed. ATP binding initiates the recovery stroke of
recocking the lever arm. A new ATP molecule binds to myosin to repeat the
cycle for further steps along the actin filament. The sliding filament model

23
of myosin–actin action underlies muscle contraction driven by cross-bridges
(Huxley 1996; Huxley 2000). The average rate constant for cross-bridge sliding
is given by k = k0e −Q/RT where Q = 12kh2 = work done, h is the work stroke
between 45° and 90° states and κ, the cross-bridge stiffness. A sliding force
of ∼3–5 pN between the myosin tail and the actin filament is generated yielding a step displacement of ∼5 nm (sliding filament hypothesis). The force
generated is linear with stroke with the gradient (dF/dh) determined by
myosin–actin overlap (number of cross-bridges). This is followed by a highly
non-linear hysteretic force recovery. In muscle, myosin and actin filaments
overlap with the degree of overlap determining force production. Shortening
of muscle occurs through sliding of thick filaments (myosin) along thin filaments (actin). Heads of myosin project from the thick filament forming
cross brides with the thin filament – they exert a force and then detach repeatedly along the filament with a sliding step distance of 60 nm.
Kinesin is a motor protein that is powered by ATP hydrolysis to move
cargo by walking along the surface of microtubules to specific destinations.
Kinesin walks on tubulin with its two heads alternating hand-over-hand generating 8 nm steps. The kinesin motor is involved in mitosis and meiosis,
mRNA and protein transport, organelle and vesicle transport and signal pathways. Kinesin comprises two identical globular heads at one end of a long
coiled-coil stalk and a pair of light chains bound at the tail end of the stalk
(Cross 2004; Miki et al. 2005). The head includes a catalytic pocket for ATP
hydrolysis and binding sites for microtubules and is the active mover.
Kinesin moves through a conformation change in its 15-amino acid long
neck linker triggered by binding to ATP (power stroke). The neck linker
swings one of the two heads along the microtubule by 80 Å, in turn, generating
hand-over-hand movement of 16.6 nm (Yildiz & Selvin 2005). Force-velocity
curves of single kinesin molecules suggest that kinesin is a loosely coupled
motor with a maximum force of 5–6 pN (Svoboda & Block 1994). The stalk
and tail bind with cargo molecules while the neck between the stalk and
head determines the directionality of walking. Kinesin is associated with
microtubules and takes 50–100 steps at a time (processive) before dissociating
from a microtubule equating to several microns (Howard et al. 1989;
Mandelkow & Mandelkow 2002) while myosin associated with actin takes a
single step at a time. ATP hydrolysis and releasing phosphate induces the
recovery stroke. While kinesins are directed to the plus end of microtubules,
dynein is directed to the minus end. Movement is undertaken by dynein
which interacts with the microtubules by generating a force towards the
minus-end of microtubules (Vallee & Stehman 2005). Dynein and kinesin
are the two microtubule-binding proteins associated with the motor protein
ATP synthase at the origin of the movement. Dyneins are the largest and
most complex of the three linear motors of eukaryotes (dynein, kinesin and
myosin), being some ten times larger than kinesin, the other microtubule
motor. The dynein motor has a ring-shaped core of seven proteins enclosing
a cavity with protruding two levers – a 20–30 nm tail for binding to cargo and
a 10–12 nm stalk (B-link) for binding to the microtubule track (Koonce &
Samso 2004; Asai & Koonce 2001). It is thus quite distinct from kinesin
and myosin but shares features with them. The dynein head rotates through
one-quarter turn against the stem and pulls on the α-coiled stalk powered
by ATP hydrolysis. The base of the stalk translates 708 nm and the tip of
the stalk by 16 nm. Dynein undertakes 8 nm steps similar to that of kinesin
(8 nm) and some myosins (5 nm). The stalk acts as a tension cable; thus,
dynein appears to act as a winch (Burgess & Knight 2004).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Cambridge University Press, on 27 Mar 2018 at 07:56:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1473550417000532

