Heat Pipe Solar Receiver for Oxygen Production of
Lunar Regolith
John R. Hartenstine, William G. Anderson,
Kara L. Walker and Michael C. Ellis
Advanced Cooling Technologies, Inc.
1046 New Holland Avenue
Lancaster, Pennsylvania 17601
717-295-6112; john.hartenstine@1-act.com
Abstract. A heat pipe solar receiver operating in the 1050°C range is proposed for use in the hydrogen reduction process
for the extraction of oxygen from the lunar soil. The heat pipe solar receiver is designed to accept, isothermalize and
transfer solar thermal energy to reactors for oxygen production. This increases the available area for heat transfer, and
increases throughput and efficiency. The heat pipe uses sodium as the working fluid, and Haynes 230 as the heat pipe
envelope material. Initial design requirements have been established for the heat pipe solar receiver design based on
information from the NASA In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) program. Multiple heat pipe solar receiver designs
were evaluated based on thermal performance, temperature uniformity, and integration with the solar concentrator and
the regolith reactor(s). Two designs were selected based on these criteria: an annular heat pipe contained within the
regolith reactor and an annular heat pipe with a remote location for the reactor. Additional design concepts have been
developed that would use a single concentrator with a single solar receiver to supply and regulate power to multiple
reactors. These designs use variable conductance or pressure controlled heat pipes for passive power distribution
management between reactors. Following the design study, a demonstration heat pipe solar receiver was fabricated and
tested. Test results demonstrated near uniform temperature on the outer surface of the pipe, which will ultimately be in
contact with the regolith reactor.
Keywords: Lunar Regolith, Solar Concentrator, Heat Pipe, Hydrogen Permeation, Thermal Fatigue
PACS: 44.35.+c, 44.0.+i

INTRODUCTION
The lunar soil contains oxygen in the form of various oxides, such as silicon dioxide, and calcium, iron and
magnesium oxides. Extracting and processing this oxygen for consumption by astronauts or use in propulsion
systems will significantly reduce the mass a spacecraft must transport from the Earth to the moon. Furthermore,
lunar based oxygen production is an important step towards sustainable, Earth-independent habitation of the moon
(Colozza and Wong, 2006). Realizing this goal would be invaluable for further exploration of the solar system
(Findiesen et al., 2008).
For this reason, a number of potential processes have been examined for oxygen production, such as vacuum
pyrolysis, ilmenite reduction by hydrogen and carbon, and magma electrolysis. Vacuum pyrolysis involves heating
lunar regolith to high temperature, 2000-2600°C, which vaporizes the oxides and releases oxygen. Carbon reduction
is a three step process and begins with heating the regolith to approximately 1625°C. Hot regolith is exposed to
methane gas, which produces carbon monoxide and hydrogen. In the second step, the temperature is reduced and
the product gases of the first step combine to form methane and water. Water electrolysis comprises the third step,
which results in oxygen (Gustafson et al., 2005). Finally, hydrogen reduction operates at the lowest overall
temperature range, 1000-1100°C, and is a two-step process. Regolith is heated to temperature and exposed to
hydrogen. The hydrogen reduces the oxides, resulting in liquid water. Like carbon reduction, oxygen is produced
from electrolysis of this water (Colozza and Wong, 2006). A sodium heat pipe solar receiver operating in the

1000°C to 1100°C temperature range was examined for use with the hydrogen reduction process. The heat pipe
solar receiver will accept, isothermalize and transfer the solar thermal energy to reactors for oxygen production
using the available lunar soil.
Heat pipes have several advantages for solar power distribution. First, the heat pipe solar receiver can be scaled to
increasing heat loads depending upon the solar concentrator design. Second, heat pipes are robust, self-contained,
and passive devices. Self-containment allows the heat pipe solar receiver to withstand the abrasive nature of lunar
regolith. Design and material selection minimize thermal shock and fatigue resulting from the large temperature
swings of the operating environment. The lack of moving parts significantly reduces maintenance. Finally,
isothermal operation allows for increased process efficiency. Direct illumination of the solar flux into a reactor core
may generate non-uniform heating. Isothermalizing and transferring the thermal energy to the larger surface area
increases the lunar regolith processing efficiency.

SYSTEM INTEGRATION
The solar concentrator determines the direction of the solar flux and the associated heat pipe receiver orientation. In
an initial design, the solar flux incident from the lunar horizon will be directed downward into the opening of the
solar receiver. The heat pipe solar receiver is positioned vertically with respect to lunar gravity. Design
considerations involved a single regolith processing plant that will produce 500 kg of oxygen per year. For a half
scale plant, the thermal power for the reactors is 3.08kWth. 1.95kW of this amount is required to heat the regolith
batch, and 1.13kW is required to make up for thermal losses of the batch to the environment. The losses are
dependant upon insulation designs chosen. The operational conditions are detailed in Table 1. In addition, a
terrestrial based system has been established for evaluating the regolith reactor. The heat pipe solar receiver was
requested to fit within the geometric boundary of the reactor to simplify test stand integration.
TABLE 1. Lunar Regolith Reactor Operational Parameters and Environmental Conditions (NASA/JSC).
Parameter/Requirement
Value/Range
Oxygen Production per plant
500 kg/year
Thermal power during startup (bringing reactor to temperature)
3.08 kW (half scale plant)
Thermal power during steady state
1.13 kW
(maintaining reactor at temperature)
Operating temperature
600-1050°C
-63 to 41 °C (210 to 314 K), Lunar Equator
Sink temperature
-143 to -61 °C (130 to 212 K), Shackleton Crater
Heat flux profile
TBD, but is estimated at 10-20 W/cm2
Temperature range for Hydrogen
600°C to 1050°C
Receiver orientation
Vertical
Duty cycle
70% daylight operation
Reactor(s) - Heater Profile
(ESTIMATED)

Estimated Temperature Heating Profile for One Sandman Reactor
(L. Oryshchyn, 7/11/08)

6000

1200
1100

5000

1000
900

Temperature (C)

Power (W)

4000

3000

2000

800
700
600
500
400
300

1000

200
0
0:00

100
0:30

1:00

1:30

2:00

2:30

3:00

3:30

4:00

4:30

5:00

5:30

Reactor 1

Reactor 2

6:00

6:30

7:00

7:30

0
0

Time (hr)
Both Reactors

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Time (minutes)

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1. (a) Regolith Reactor Heater Profile and (b) Estimated Temperature Profile for One Sandman Reactor (NASA/JSC).

Approximated regolith reactor operation parameters were provided by L. Oryshchyn of NASA/JSC. The regolith
reactor will ramp up to 1050°C in an hour, process the regolith for an additional hour and 15 minutes, and then

dump the processed regolith. Remaining unknown parameters include the temperature profile during the charging
and dumping processes. A graph of the estimated temperature heating profile can be seen in Figure 1. One regolith
reactor is expected to have a 2.5 hour batch time. Currently, two regolith reactors are expected to function at the
same time. In this approach, Reactor #1 runs 3 cycles while Reactor #2 runs 2 cycles. A plot of the approximated
reactor heater profiles can be seen in Figure 1.

Heat Pipe Solar Receiver Concepts
A number of potential heat pipe solar receiver concepts were identified and evaluated by thermal performance,
temperature uniformity, integration with the concentrator, and integration with the existing reactor geometry. The
concepts evaluated use single or multiple heat pipes to transfer the solar load to the regolith reactor. A total of five
potential design options were evaluated: 1) Multiple straight heat pipe configurations, 2) Multiple bent heat pipe
configuration, 3) Annular heat pipe design with condenser extending into the regolith reactor, 4) Annular heat pipe
receiver contained within the regolith reactor, and 5) Annular heat pipe receiver with an extension leading into the
regolith reactor. Concepts 4 and 5 were down-selected for further consideration
Direct illumination of the solar flux into a reactor core may generate non-uniform heating. A common vapor space
heat pipe will accept, isothermalize and transfer the non-uniform heat flux solar loading to the regolith reactor for
efficient material processing: concepts 4 and 5 exhibit thermal characteristics to meet this requirement. These
concepts, shown in Figure 3, can be integrated with the proposed solar concentrator and have a simple geometry,
which allows for robust and efficient radiation heat shields to reduce ambient losses. Concept 4 shows the receiver
integral with the regolith reactor. Concept 5 shows the receiver with a remote regolith reactor. Ease of integration
with the existing regolith reactor is also a key feature, so that the concepts selected could replace the existing
electrical heater hardware.

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2. Heat Pipe Solar Receiver (a) Concepts 4 and (b) Concepts 5 (NASA/JSC).

Heat Pipe Solar Receiver Design
The general design details for the heat pipe solar receiver are shown in Figure 3. The heat pipe has a 38.1 mm
diameter aperture that is 406 mm in length. This figure also details the location of the heat pipe liquid return wick
structure. A design using a screen wick is presented, although a wick using a sintered powder may be required
depending upon the incident solar heat flux. This selection depends on the critical heat flux, which is defined for a
heat pipe as the heat flux sufficient to prevent the working fluid from re-wetting the evaporator surface. Typical
heat flux limits for screen are up to 30W/cm2, while sintered powder metal heat flux limits are approximately ≤
75W/cm2, depending upon the wick properties and design. Five wraps of 270 mesh stainless steel screen will be
bonded to the evaporator and condenser surfaces and connected to each other through 4 liquid return bridges.

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3. (a) Initial Heat Pipe Receiver Design Side View with Regolith Reactor and (b) Initial Heat Pipe Receiver Design
Cross Section Showing Screen Wick Structure.

FIGURE 4. Heat pipe solar receiver wick design performance parameters.

The heat pipe solar receiver will experience gravitational acceleration of 9.81m/s2 (1 g) on Earth and 1.62 m/s2
(0.165 g) on the moon. Due to the vertical orientation of the solar receiver, the heat pipe wick will need to operate
against gravity. In this case the wick will need to self prime at a length of roughly 0.475 m. Calculations were
performed to determine the maximum pore size required to prime the wick. For the entire wick to be operational,
the selected pore size must be smaller than this maximum. At 1050°C, the maximum pore size required is 64.7μm.
270 mesh screen has a pore radius of 47 μm, allowing the wick to self prime. The capillary pumping capability and
the associated pressure drop summary is shown in Figure 4 for the power where the pressure drops equal the
capillary capability. It can be seen that the wick properties can adequately meet the 3,000W transport power
requirements.

Hydrogen Permeation
During regolith processing hydrogen is injected into the reaction process at approximately 600°C to 1050°C at
approximately 10 psi. An evaluation was conducted and indicated that hydrogen will permeate into the heat pipe:
the amount of hydrogen permeating the Haynes 230 wall is constant at 1.3 μg/s for this geometry. Hydrogen that
permeates into the heat pipe will collect in the heat pipe condenser, hindering heat transfer. Possible solutions to
reduce the hydrogen permeation rate include barrier coatings to minimize permeation, and/or a porous tri-layer wick
boundary to vent hydrogen. In the current configuration the regolith reactor can be made as a separate structure
surrounding the heat pipe, as shown in Figure 5. The gap between the heat pipe and the reactor can be filled with
potential hydrogen barrier coatings. The second method is to fill a gap between the heat pipe and the reactor wall
with a thin layer of porous powder metal. The thin layer of powder metal will fill the length of the heat pipe as
shown in Figure 5. The end of the gap will be open to the vacuum of space. During operation the hydrogen will
permeate through the reactor wall and into the powder metal. The hydrogen will permeate out of the powder

particles and form molecular hydrogen due to the large surface area of the powder and the low partial pressure at the
powder surface (Anderson et al., 1995). The molecular hydrogen is subsequently vented to space. This
significantly reduces hydrogen permeation into the heat pipe. One issue with the porous powder metal hydrogen
permeation boundary is the temperature difference across the porous layer. Calculations were performed to
determine the ΔT across the gap, i.e., what solar receiver temperature is required to meet the 1050°C regolith reactor
temperature requirement. With a transferred power of 3.4 kW and a target reactor temperature of 1050 °C, the
sodium vapor temperature would be 1056.3 °C.

FIGURE 5. Solar Receiver Integration Layout.

Structural Analysis
Structural analyses were performed on the preliminary solar receiver design based on the stresses due to the vapor
pressure of sodium at various temperatures. The stresses were then used to estimate the creep time to rupture values
for the Haynes 230 material at temperatures from approximately 1000°C to 1200°C. The creep analysis was
performed for both the inner and outer cylinders as well as both end caps in the heat pipe. The Larson Miller
Parameter (LMP) was used to make a conservative estimate of the lifetime of the heat pipe operating at varying
temperatures and stresses (Blake, 1985). This parameter relates expected lifetime prior to rupture with temperature
and pressure. Data was taken from the Haynes 230 brochure provided by Haynes International as well as additional
Haynes 230 data that was provided for higher temperatures. Data was also provided by Shingledecker et al. (2004).
The LMP value was then used to calculate the time to rupture using equation (1):
LMP

t R = 10 T + 273.15

−C

(1)

where:
tR
= Time to Rupture (hours)
T
= Temperature (°C)
LMP = Larson-Miller Parameter

A constant C of 17.6 was used for the Larson Miller calculations. Calculations were performed for all portions of
the heat pipe. At 1204°C the outer pipe will experience creep rupture failure after roughly 25 hours. This is the
greatest concern in the structural analysis. However, the designed heat pipe will be operating at roughly 1050°C. At
1050°C the outer pipe will experience creep rupture failure after 1.23x105 hours, the inner pipe will experience creep
rupture failure after 4.17x105 hours, and the flat end cap will experience creep rupture failure after 2.08x105 hours.
The lunar regolith reactor is expected to operate for 6,100 hours a year. According to these results, failure due to
creep rupture will not be a concern, as it will take 1.23x105 hours before any part of the heat pipe is in danger of
such failure. Even though the creep rupture analysis indicates acceptable life, additional work will be conducted to
evaluate the high temperature characteristics in greater detail.

Heat Pipe Solar Receiver Thermal Analysis
There are a number of potential concentrators that are being considered, including an inflatable design and rigid
designs with single or multi-faceted mirrors and refractive secondary concentrators. Testing of a refractive
secondary concentrator was conducted at NASA (Geng and Devarakonda, 2002). A refractive secondary
concentrator was inserted into a rhenium cavity and tested using the lamps from Tank 6 at NASA/GRC. Specific
heat flux values over eight discrete locations along the rhenium cavity length were established. At a solar power
setting of 1150W, the solar flux reached a maximum of approximately 10W/cm2. A thermal analysis was performed
for the designed heat pipe using Blue Ridge Numerics CFDesign. Boundary conditions were determined from the
refractive secondary test data. This data was based on a solar receiver length of roughly 8 inches and a secondary
concentrator of roughly the same length. Based on this data, the heat flux past the first 8 inches of the solar receiver
was assumed to be minimal.
The thermal model includes the outer wall of the receiver, the nickel powder metal wick, and the regolith reactor
inner wall. The heat transfer coefficient on the inner wall of the reactor was approximated as there is no data
currently available for the regolith/hydrogen mixture. The model used a heat transfer coefficient of 100,000 W/m2K
at 1050°C. Figure 6 shows the results and boundary conditions of the thermal analysis. The highest temperature
reached is 1093.72°C at 7.1 inches into the heat pipe solar receiver. All of the heat that is applied by the secondary
concentrator is contained within the inner pipe. Calculations were performed to determine the pressure and
temperature drop within the vapor space. The values were so low that the temperature drop within the pipe was
negligible.

FIGURE 6. Thermal Analysis Results.

Multiple Reactor Design
Design concepts were also evaluated that incorporate a single solar receiver supplying varying power to two
reactors, compared to the designs above which have a single solar receiver supplying power to a single reactor. Heat
pipes can be used to control the transfer of thermal loading from one reactor to the other reactor. Initially, 4kW of
power would be transferred into the first reactor at startup. Once this reactor reaches 1050°C, 3kW would be
switched to the second reactor. 1kW would continue to be transferred to the first reactor to maintain processing
temperature. After the second reactor reaches 1050°C, 2kW is switched back to the first reactor giving a total of
3kW to first reactor and 1kW to the second reactor. The spent regolith would need to be dumped and the reactor
would be refilled during change-overs. A reduction in solar input may have to occur to handle the cross-over so that
overheating does not occur. A conventional constant conductance heat pipe design would not meet the requirement
to control the thermal loading between multiple reactors using a single solar receiver. Instead, variable conductance
heat pipes or pressure controlled heat pipes would be used.
A Variable Conductance Heat Pipe (VCHP) is similar to a conventional heat pipe, but has a reservoir and controlled
amount of non-condensable gas (NCG) inside the reservoir. A VCHP controls thermal energy transfer by varying
the amount of condenser available to the working fluid, by compressing and expanding the NCG. A Pressure-

Controlled Heat Pipe (PCHP) is similar device that permits control over heat pipe operation by varying the gas
quantity. The PCHP differs from a VCHP in the aspect that it contains a reservoir as well as a pump to modulate the
quantity of gas in the heat pipe. By varying the quantity of gas in the heat pipe the amount of active condenser is
controlled. For the solar receiver application transferring back and forth between multiple reactors, a PCHP could
be used in a manner similar to that shown in Figure 7. The components would include a single solar receiver with
two PCHP condensers and reservoirs, and two constant conductance heat pipes. The PCHPs would control the gas
front and subsequent power delivery to each reactor. The CCHP would transfer the thermal load to the reactor from
the variable PCHP. The change in the exposed length of the transport heat pipe would vary as power is transferred.

FIGURE 7. PCHP Concept for Solar Receiver with Dual Regolith Reactors.

DEMONSTRATION HEAT PIPE
A representative solar receiver heat pipe was designed and fabricated as a proof-of-concept test article. The
demonstration heat pipe has an annular configuration, and was manufactured from Haynes 230 with a stainless steel
screen wick, and with sodium as the working fluid. The heat pipe is oriented horizontally for ground testing, to
allow it to fit into the NASA MSFC test rig. The completed heat pipe was instrumented and insulated to minimize
heat loss to the surroundings. A photograph of the instrumented assembly is shown in Figure 8a. Figure 8b, right
shows the heat pipe operating at approximately 1050°C. Electrical power was input to the Kanthal heater and the
temperature profile recorded using a data logger. The power was increased until the heat pipe vapor temperature
reached 1050°C. The thermal profile for the demonstration heat pipe assembly is shown in Figure 9. The thermal
profile plots the individual thermocouples and the approximate electrical power input to the heater. The data
indicates that the heat pipe is nearly isothermal. At 1050°C, the difference between the maximum and minimum
temperature across the outside diameter of the pipe was 5-6°C. The inner wall temperature measured approximately
1065°C, with a 1050°C vapor and outer wall temperature, indicating that the screen wick structure was sufficient to
wet the evaporator surface.

FIGURE 8. (a) Demonstration heat pipe test set up and (b) demonstration heat pipe operating at 1050°C using a Kanthal heating
element.

Demonstration Heat Pipe Solar Receiver Temperature Profile
1200

2000

1100

1800

1000
1600
1400
800
700

1200

600

1000

500

800

400
600
300

Power (W)

Temperature (deg C)

900
Inner Wall
Outer Wall Top 1
Outer Wall Top 2
Outer Wall Side
Outer Wall Side
Outer Wall Bottom
Outer Wall Bottom
Outer Wall Side
Outer Wall Side
Vapor
Power

400
200
200

100
0
0:00:00

1:12:00

2:24:00

3:36:00

4:48:00

6:00:00

0
7:12:00

Time (minutes)

FIGURE 9. Thermal profile for the demonstration heat pipe.

CONCLUSION
A means to extract oxygen from the lunar soil is required for Earth-independent habitation on the moon. A
hydrogen reduction process is being considered, using the solar thermal energy to heat and process the lunar
material. High temperature heat pipes were evaluated for solar power distribution to the regolith process reactors:
two heat pipe solar receiver designs were developed. Each design is an annular heat pipe design with a common
vapor space. In one concept, the heat pipe receiver is contained within the regolith reactor. Incident solar flux is
distributed into an aperture that forms the inside diameter of the heat pipe. The solar energy is transferred nearly
isothermally to the regolith process. In the second concept, the same heat pipe design is used, except the thermal
load can be transferred to a remote location. Heat pipe geometry, wick structure design, and mechanical stresses due
to sodium vapor pressure were determined. In addition, hydrogen permeation into the heat pipe was addressed along
with potential methods to reduce the permeation rate. Methods to control the thermal loading to from a single solar
source to multiple reactors was evaluated using VCHP’s and PCHP’s. In addition, a demonstration annular heat
pipe was designed, fabricated and tested up to 1050°C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was sponsored by NASA Glenn Research Center under Purchase Order No. NNX08CB57P. Mr. Don
Jaworske of NASA Glenn Research Center was the Technical Monitor. The authors would like to acknowledge Mr.
Bob Macosko of Analex for his input on solar receiver design concepts, Tom Simon (NASA/Johnson Space Center)
and Diane Linne (NASA/Glenn Research Center) for their input on regolith reactor designs and thermal loadings,
and Lara Oryshchyn (NASA/JSC) for input on thermal loadings as well as hydrogen permeation. S. Krishna
Srivastava of Haynes International provided creep property data on Haynes 230 at elevated temperatures. Messrs.
Rod McClellan, Tim Wagner, Steve Eckman and Ken Knier were the laboratory technicians responsible for the
fabrication and testing of the demonstration heat pipe and nickel wick analysis.

REFERENCES
Anderson, W.G., Hartenstine, J.R., North, M. and Lundberg, L., “Hydrogen-Tolerant Heat Pipes for Bimodal Systems,” in the
proceedings of the 30th Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, IECEC, AP-44, July 30-August 1, (1995).
Blake, A., Editor-In-Chief, Handbook of Mechanics, Materials, and Structures, Wiley-Interscience, New York, New York, 1985,
p. 368.
Colozza, A.J. and Wong, W.A., “Evaluation of a Stirling Solar Dynamic System for Lunar Oxygen Production,” NASA/TM2006-21436, (2006).

Findiesen, W., Martin, B., Born, A., McCormick, D. and Bienhoff, D., “Simulation and Analysis of Architectures for a Lunar
Surface Outpost,” in the proceedings of Space Technology and Applications International Forum (STAIF-08), edited by
M.S. El-Genk, AIP Conference Proceedings 969, Melville, NY, (2008), pp. 851-860.
Geng, S.M., and Devarakonda, A., “Thermal Analysis of a Fused Silica Refractive Secondary Concentrator (RSC),” November
25, (2002).
Gustafson, R. J., Rice, E. E. and White, B. C., “Carbon Reduction of Lunar Regolith for Oxygen Production,” in the proceedings
of Space Technology and Applications International Forum (STAIF-05), edited by M.S. El-Genk, AIP Conference
Proceedings 746, Melville, NY, (2005), pp. 1224 -1228.
Shingledecker, John P., Swindeman, Robert W., Wu, Quanyan and Vasudevan, Vijay K., “Creep Strength of High-Temperature
Alloys for Ultrasupercritical Steam Boilers,” in the proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Advances in
Materials Technology for Fossil Power Plants, October 25-28, (2004).

