Progress Made in Lunar In-Situ Resource Utilization under NASA’s
Exploration Technology and Development Program
G.B. Sanders1, W.E. Larson2
1

NASA/Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 77058, USA; (281) 483-9066;
gerald.b.sanders@nasa.gov
2
NASA/Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, FL, 32899, USA; (321) 867-8747;
william.e.larson@nasa.gov

ABSTRACT
Incorporation of In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) and the production of
mission critical consumables for 9 propulsion, power, and life support into mission
architectures can greatly reduce the mass, cost, and risk of missions 10 leading to a
sustainable and affordable approach to human exploration beyond Earth. ISRU and its
products can 11 also greatly affect how other exploration systems are developed,
including determining which technologies are 12 important or enabling. While the
concept of lunar ISRU has existed for over 40 years, the technologies and systems 13
had not progressed much past simple laboratory proof-of-concept tests. With the
release of the Vision for Space 14 Exploration in 2004 with the goal of harnessing the
Moon‟s resources, NASA initiated the ISRU Project in the 15 Exploration
Technology Development Program (ETDP) to develop the technologies and systems
needed to meet 16 this goal. In the five years of work in the ISRU Project, significant
advancements and accomplishments occurred in 17 several important areas of lunar
ISRU. Also, two analog field tests held in Hawaii in 2008 and 2010 demonstrated 18
all the steps in ISRU capabilities required along with the integration of ISRU
products and hardware with 19 propulsion, power, and cryogenic storage systems.
This paper will review the scope of the ISRU Project in the 20 ETDP, ISRU
incorporation and development strategies utilized by the ISRU Project, and ISRU
development and 21 test accomplishments over the five years of funded project
activity.
INTRODUCTION
In the Vision for Space Exploration released by the United States President in
2004, it stated that NASA must “…develop new technologies and harness the moon‟s
abundant resources to allow manned exploration of more challenging environments.”
By harnessing space resources, explorers would not have to bring everything from
Earth as they did for the Apollo missions, thereby either reducing the total mass of
hardware launched from Earth or increasing what can be accomplished with the same
launch vehicle. While the concept of utilizing resources at the site of exploration,
commonly referred to as In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU), had been proposed
before the first man walked on the Moon, development of this capability had not
progressed much past feasibility tests under laboratory conditions during the
subsequent forty years. In 2005, NASA created the ISRU Project in the Exploration
Technology and Development Program (ETDP).

The purpose of this project was to:
Develop technologies, hardware, and systems to Technology Readiness Level
(TRL) 6
Mitigate the risk of utilizing ISRU in future robotic and human missions to the
Moon, Mars, & beyond
Coordinate development of ISRU technologies and systems with other
exploration systems
Coordinate insertion of ISRU capabilities into architecture and mission plans.
The ISRU Project was led first by the NASA Johnson Space Center (JSC), and
then by the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), and involved personnel from the Marshall
Space Flight Center (MSFC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), Ames Research Center
(ARC), and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Significant work was also
performed by industry and academia through contracts, grants, Small Business
Innovative Research (SBIR), and Internal Research and Development (IR&D).
IN-SITU RESOURCE UTILIZATION
The purpose of In-Situ Resource Utilization is to harness and utilize resources at
the site of exploration (both natural and discarded) to create products and services
that reduce the mass, cost, and risk of robotic and human exploration as well as
increase performance or enable new mission concepts compared to bringing
everything from Earth. The immediate goal of ISRU is to greatly reduce the direct
expense of humans going to and returning from the Moon and Mars, and then to build
toward self-sufficiency of long-duration crewed space bases to expand our
exploration efforts, and to enable the commercialization of space. Five major areas of
ISRU that have been shown to have great interest and benefit to future robotic and
human exploration architectures are:
1. Resource Characterization and Mapping (physical, mineral/chemical, and
volatiles/water)
2. Mission Consumable Production (propellants, fuel cell reagents, life support
consumables, and feedstock for manufacturing & construction)
3. Civil Engineering & Surface Construction (radiation shields, landing pads,
habitats, etc.)
4. Energy Generation, Storage, and Transfer with In-situ Resources (solar,
electrical, thermal)
5. Manufacturing and Repair with In-situ Resources (spare parts, wires, trusses,
systems etc.)
ISRU is a capability involving multiple technical discipline elements including
mobility, regolith manipulation, regolith processing, chemical and thermal
processing, product separation and storage & delivery, power, and manufacturing.
IMPACT OF ISRU ON OTHER SYSTEMS AND ELEMENTS IN LUNAR
ARCHITECTURES
Today, missions must bring all of the propellant, air, food, water, habitable
volume, and shielding needed to sustain human explorers for trips beyond Earth.
Resources for production of propellants and life support consumables along with

feedstock for construction of support systems and habitats must be found in space and
utilized if humans ever hope to explore and colonize space beyond Earth.
ISRU capabilities and systems cannot exist on their own. By definition, ISRU
systems must connect and tie to one or more users to deliver desired capabilities and
products. Therefore, the benefit of incorporating ISRU into mission plans is directly
related to the extent to which it is used and when it is used. Without ISRU,
exploration missions must bring everything needed to sustain astronauts from the
surface of the Earth. Because human exploration missions require significant
amounts of oxygen, water, and fuel, incorporation of ISRU into missions has
primarily focused on extracting or producing these mission critical consumables.
What is not often readily apparent to architecture and mission planners is that
the incorporation of ISRU and the products it creates can strongly influence
architecture choices as well as the design, development, and operation of surface and
transportation systems. From an architectural perspective, incorporation of ISRU and
its products can greatly change (for the better) the following architectural decisions.
Level of reusability (none or multi-use)
Duration of stay on surface (short vs. long/permanent)
Level of protection for crew and hardware (radiation and debris shielding)
Location of exploration (resources, sunlight, environment)
Commercial involvement (production of consumables, power, transportation,
construction, depots)
Mission Staging (Earth Orbit, Earth-Moon L1/L2, Low Lunar Orbit, Lunar
Surface)
Pre-deployment (set up before crew arrives or all at once)
Abort strategies (To orbit and back to Earth or to surface and wait)
Hub-and-spoke surface exploration from a centralized base or all missions to
different lunar locations launched from Earth
Incorporation of ISRU and its products can also greatly affect how other
exploration systems are developed, including determining which technologies are
important or enabling. Table 1 below depicts design requirements that are impacted
or shared with ISRU systems linked to the exploration system as well as what
technologies and hardware can potentially be shared between the exploration system
and corresponding ISRU process.

Table 1. Impact of ISRU on Exploration System Requirements and Hardware
Requirements Impacted or Shared
Propulsion

Life Support &
EVA Systems

Hardware Impacted or Shared

Type of propellant and/or pressurant

Propellant/pressurant storage tanks and valves

Quantity and production rate of propellant/pressurant

Propellant/pressurant transfer

Propellant storage quality (temperature & pressure)

Solar collectors

Type of life support consumables

Consumable storage tanks and valves

Quantity and production rate of consumables

Water processing/electrolysis

Waste products and trash type

Waste/trash processing

Waste products and trash quantity

Carbon dioxide processing

Consumable storage quality (temperature & pressure)

Reactant/product seperation
Consumable transfer
Solar collectors

Shielding and protection for crew and equipment
Habitat

Structure and shielding concepts

Inflation gas quantity and type
Thermal management

Surface Mobility

Mobility vehicle size

Mobile platforms for excavation & civil enginerring

Mobility vehicle terrain and environment compatibility

Actuators, motors, and control software

Mobility power requirements

Power

Daytime power amount (nominal & maximum)

Consumable storage tanks and valves

Nightime/eclipse power amount

Water processing/electrolysis

Fuel cell reactant type

Propellant/pressurant transfer

Quantity and production rate of fuel cell reactants

Reactant/product seperation

Fuel cell reactant storage quality (temp & pressure)

Consumable transfer
Solar collectors/thermal energy storage and transfer

Science

Sample mineral characterization and mapping

Science instruments

Sample physical characterization

Subsurface sample access

Sample volatile characterization and mapping

Test gases and reagents for science

INCORPORATION STRATEGY
The ability to harness and utilize space resources has been listed as an important
goal in numerous NASA and international strategic planning and architecture studies.
To achieve the greatest benefit of utilizing ISRU systems in robotic and human
exploration missions, it is important to consider incorporation of ISRU products from
the start in architecture and mission planning, since the benefit of incorporating ISRU
is directly related to the extent to which it is used and when it is used. When
considering strategies on how best to incorporate ISRU into future mission plans, it is
important to consider how to mitigate the risk associated with ISRU systems,
especially since they have not been used in any previous robotic or human missions.
One approach is to consider technical and performance risk reduction strategies, the
other is to consider mission risk reduction with respect to mission success.
For incorporation strategies dealing with technical and performance risk
reduction, it is important to start with the minimum of infrastructure required and the
simplest systems possible. Efficiency and performance increases should be
evolutionary based on lessons learned from previous work. Early hardware needs to
be achievable (not necessarily optimized) and scalable to future missions and outpost
growth. Use of terrestrial analog field tests, robotic precursor missions, and predeployment of hardware allows for incremental reduction in technical and
performance risks. ISRU capabilities need to grow on an as-needed basis with the
growth and expansion of surface activities. For example, surface construction and

manufacturing will start with simple/high leverage products and expand to greater
self-sufficiency capabilities over time.
For incorporation strategies dealing with risk reduction for mission success, the
approach utilized for the Constellation Program and the Global Point of Departure
(GPoD) lunar architecture with the International Space Exploration Coordination
Group (ISECG) was to identify ISRU capabilities and technologies that could meet
one or more of the following criteria: (i) reduce mission mass and risk, (ii) help solve
limitations to the architecture, (iii) enable long-term sustainability, and/or (iv) support
future Mars exploration activities. The ISRU capabilities identified would then be
incorporated into mission plans by first demonstrating the feasibility of the ISRU
system through proof-of-concept demonstrations on robotic precursor or early human
missions, and then through deployment of pilot scale operations. These pilot scale
ISRU systems would be used to enhance or extend mission capabilities and/or reduce
mission risk. If possible, ISRU systems were pre-deployed and operated remotely
before the crew arrived to ensure that ISRU products were available at the start of the
mission before the crew left Earth. Once the pilot ISRU system had adequately
verified production rates, reliability, and long-term operations, full scale ISRU
systems for mission critical operations could be implemented. Once a central
exploration base is selected, ISRU incorporated into missions must ensure a constant
delivery of products, with incremental growth in both the number of products and
quantity of products.
LUNAR RESOURCES & ISRU DEVELOPMENT
Lunar exploration mission concepts primarily consider the use of lunar regolith,
solar wind volatiles, and potentially water ice and other volatiles at the lunar poles for
the production of propellants, life support consumables, radiation shields, and
habitat/infrastructure construction. Before recent findings of water on the Moon,
most lunar mission trade study and design efforts that included ISRU focused on the
production of oxygen from oxygen bearing ores in lunar regolith, and removal of
solar wind deposited elements. The lunar regolith is primarily made up of four major
mineral types: pyroxene, anorthite, olivine, and ilmenite, and over 42% by mass of
lunar regolith is oxygen. Table 2 depicts the major constituents of lunar mare
samples and solar wind volatiles released from Apollo samples. The table also
depicts the major volatiles released after the impact of the Lunar Crater Observation
& Sensing Satellite (LCROSS). Examining regolith and solar wind volatile
constituents in Table 2, the Moon is poor in carbon resources. However, trash,
waste, and discarded composite structures are carbon rich, and the potential for
carbon monoxide and other hydrocarbons in polar shadowed areas are also important
resources for sustained human lunar exploration.
Based on what is known about the resources present on the Moon (both natural
and discarded), and the uncertainties associated with the form and concentration of
water and other volatiles at the lunar poles, the ISRU Project in ETDP focused on
developing technologies and systems in the following areas:
Polar Ice/Volatile Resource Characterization and Mapping
Extraction of Oxygen from Lunar Regolith
Excavation of Lunar Regolith for Oxygen Extraction and Civil Engineering

Fuel/Water Production from In-Situ Carbon Sources
To support design and hardware development in these three task areas, the
ISRU Project in ETDP also initiated work in the following areas:
Lunar Simulant Development and Production
Process and System Modeling
Integrated Testing and Facilities
Table 2. Lunar Regolith and Volatile Constituents [1,2]
Mare Regolith
Solar Wind Volatiles
Pyroxene
50%
Hydrogen
50-150 ppm
CaO*SiO2
36.7% Helium
3-50 ppm
MgO*SiO2
29.2% Helium-3
10-2 ppm
FeO*SiO2
17.6% Carbon
100-150 ppm
Al2 O3 *SiO2
9.6%
TiO2 *SiO2
6.9% Major Volatiles from LCROSS
Anorthite
20%
Carbon Monoxide
5.70%
CaO*Al2 O3 *SiO2
97.7% Water/Ice
5.50%
Olivine
15%
Hydrogen
1.40%
2MgO*SiO2
56.6% Hydrogen Sulfide
0.92%
2FeO*SiO2
42.7% Mercury
0.48%
Ilmenite
15%
Ammonia
0.33%
FeO*TiO2
98.5%

Polar Ice/Volatile Resource Characterization
The presence of large amounts of water, hydrogen, and hydrocarbon resources
at the poles could provide significant benefits for life support, propulsion, power,
thermal control, food production and manufacturing. While orbital data sets and the
LCROSS impact have provided important information about the volatiles that exist in
the shadowed regions at the poles, there is still tremendous uncertainty in the form,
concentration, and distribution of these resources on a local scale as well as the
environment and terrain associated with gaining access to these resources. Because
of this uncertainty, the ISRU Project initiated work in developing instruments and
equipment that could serve as a payload for a robotic precursor mission to answer
fundamental science questions, such as “What resources are available on the Moon,
where are they, and in what form?” as well as critical engineering questions, such as
“How will we mine these resources, what chemical extraction processes are the most
practical and efficient, and what are the engineering challenges to be faced in this
environment?”.
Extraction of Oxygen from Lunar Regolith
Over 20 different concepts for extracting oxygen from metal and non-metal
oxides in the lunar regolith have been proposed and in several cases, subscale proofof-concept tests have been performed in the laboratory. Each process has strengths
and weaknesses in terms of extraction efficiency, energy required, and complexity of
operations. At the start of the ISRU Project in 2005, it was decided that three oxygen
extraction from regolith concepts would be pursued that spanned the range of low
risk/low performance to high risk/high performance techniques.

The low risk/low performance technique selected was the Hydrogen Reduction
of regolith process. This process heats regolith to ~900 °C (below the sintering
temperature of regolith) in the presence of hydrogen. The hydrogen reacts with iron
oxides in the regolith to form water. The water is electrolyzed with the oxygen stored
for later use and the hydrogen is recycled for further regolith reduction. The process
is low risk since the regolith remains granular during all of the processing steps, and
fluidized beds and water electrolysis are understood processing techniques. The
process is low performance since iron oxide bearing minerals are found in low
concentrations in lunar regolith, especially at the poles, so only about 1 to 3 kg of
oxygen can be extracted from every 100 kg of bulk regolith. Size sorting and mineral
beneficiation techniques can increase the surface area and concentration of iron oxide
in the feedstock such that performance can be improved.
The mid risk/mid performance technique selected was the Carbothermal
Reduction of regolith process. This process heats regolith past the melting point
(>1600 °C) in the presence of methane. The methane cracks releasing carbon into the
melt which reacts with oxygen in the silicates to release carbon monoxide. The
carbon monoxide and hydrogen released during cracking are reacted in a catalytic
reactor to create methane and water. As before, the water is electrolyzed with oxygen
stored for later use and the hydrogen recycled to remake the methane reactant. The
process is mid risk because the regolith has to be melted and managed. The process
is mid performance since silicates make up a large fraction of lunar regolith and
proof-of-concept tests have demonstrated extraction efficiencies equivalent to 10 to
20 kg of oxygen per 100 kg of bulk regolith.
The high risk/high performance technique selected for development was molten
oxide electrolysis. This process heats regolith past the melting point in the presence
of a cathode, anode, and electrical current. The current electrolyzes several
metal/non-metal oxides releasing pure oxygen gas. The process can also produce
pure iron, silicon, and other metals depending on the voltage applied. The process is
high risk due to the need to contain and process molten materials, molten metals, and
pure oxygen at high temperatures. The process is high performance since oxygen
production equivalent to 20 to 30 kg of oxygen per 100 kg of bulk regolith are
possible.
Excavation of Lunar Regolith for Oxygen Extraction and Civil Engineering
Based on lunar architecture studies performed to date, there are five possible
regolith excavation and civil engineering tasks identified for a lunar ISRU operations:
(i) Excavation for oxygen production, (ii) Excavation and material handling for
landing pad and berm fabrication, (iii) Excavation for habitat protection (ex. radiation
and micrometeoroids), (iv) Excavation for mission element emplacement (ex. Nuclear
reactor burial), and (v) Excavation for Science (ex. Trenching for stratigraphy
evaluation). The most important task identified to date is regolith excavation and
transport for oxygen production, since this is the first step in making oxygen on the
Moon.
While the term „excavation‟ brings to mind large and heavy machines and large
mining sites, this is not the case for what is required to support early ISRU oxygen
production rates that support in-situ production of oxygen for supplementing life

support systems and for possible lunar ascent propulsion (1 to 10 metric tons of
oxygen per year). However, there are significant challenges associated with regolith
excavation and civil engineering on the Moon. Lunar regolith is extremely fine
grained and abrasive raising significant wear concerns. Lunar regolith is extremely
packed below the top layer of loosely consolidated material on the surface requiring
vibration, ripping, and/or significant energy to perform the tasks required. The
vacuum and low gravity environment along with the irregular shape and electrostatic
properties of fine grain regolith also challenge terrestrial design techniques and
models for excavation and material handling/flow. To support design and
development of excavation and civil engineering hardware, the ISRU Project also
initiated work in developing new computer models and laboratory/low-g aircraft test
techniques to anchor and predict hardware performance.
Because establishing and operating a lunar base will require multiple missions
to the same location, the terrain and long-term operation in the lunar dust
environment raises several concerns that may need to be mitigated. For example,
Apollo 12 landing near the Surveyor 3 spacecraft showed that dust projected by the
Apollo Lunar Module rocket exhaust plume while landing caused abrasion and
damage to the Surveyor 3 surface. It is not inconceivable that the higher landing
thrust of proposed NASA crewed landers would cause even more damage to lunar
habitat and power systems exposed to this dusty plume. To mitigate this hazard,
fabrication of regolith berms or surface stabilization may be required. Also, because
multiple landings will need to be performed, areas near the lunar base may need to be
cleared of rock hazards so that landings can be performed with the minimum of risk.
Therefore, the ISRU Project also initiated work on hardware and techniques
associated with areas clearing, berm building, and surface stabilization for possible
early civil engineering tasks.
Fuel/Water Production from In-Situ Carbon Sources
Besides hydrogen, hydrocarbon fuels such as methane are also of interest for
propulsion and fuel cell applications for landers, hoppers, and mobile power systems.
For long term sustainability, the need to recycle waste and create plastics and other
feedstock for manufacturing, food, and chemical production is also of interest. Since
the results from the LCROSS mission were not available at the start of the ISRU
Project, work was initiated on how to convert trash and crew waste into usable
products. Even if LCORSS hydrocarbon resources are available, it is important to
have strategies for dealing with trash management. It was assumed that the trash and
crew waste would be obtained from life support systems either in its original form or
post processing to remove some of the water that might be in the trash/waste.
Because Mars ISRU and the Carbothermal Reduction of regolith process deal with
converting carbon monoxide/carbon dioxide into methane and other hydrocarbons, it
was decided that the ISRU Project would focus on process such as pyrolysis,
combustion, and steam reforming of trash/waste which were synergistic with other
ISRU processing techniques.
Lunar Simulant Development and Production
Development and demonstration of lunar ISRU is only as good as the simulants

used to test the feasibility and performance of the ISRU processes being developed.
Because supplies of the previous lunar mare simulant, JSC-1, were almost depleted at
the start of the ISRU Project and the ISRU project needed simulants right away to
begin development tests, a new supply of JSC-1 was created as a bridge until
simulants were available. Because actual lunar regolith contain glasses, agglutinates,
nano-phase iron, solar wind volatiles, and minerals and mineral phases that could
impact surface system operations, careful consideration of how „realistic‟ the new
simulants need to be verses the cost of producing them was required. It was also
recognized that other simulants have been developed or could be developed by other
organizations or industry, so a process to evaluate and standardize simulant
characterization was deemed necessary. Led by the NASA MSFC, the approach
taken in the ISRU Project to begin development of the new simulants was to: (i)
Assess and understand users‟ needs, applications, quantities, and schedule, (ii) Define
and develop simulant standards based on Apollo core samples, (iii) Define methods
of measure for simulants (past, present, future), (iv) Evaluate simulant constituent
production methods, and (v) Produce „base‟ simulants and „tailored‟ simulant blends
at required quantities based on customer needs. Because lunar architecture studies
pointed toward establishing a base at the lunar poles, focus was placed on developing
a new series of simulants based on lunar highland mineralogy.
ISRU DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
As was stated previously, while the concept of lunar ISRU has existed for over
40 years, the technology had not progressed much past simple, subscale laboratory
proof-of-concept demonstrations. A focused, evolutionary approach to developing
ISRU was required. At the start of the ISRU Project in ETDP, NASA initiated a four
phased evolutionary development and integration strategy, with each phase lasting 1
to 3 years for each technology or capability area. Phase I involved demonstrating the
feasibility of the concepts considered for human exploration missions at relevant
mission scale, with Phase II aimed at increasing the performance and optimizing the
processes involved once feasibility had been established. Phase III involved
modification and testing in mission environments (gravity, temperature/solar,
pressure/vacuum, and dust/regolith). The last phase, Phase IV, would involve
reaching TRL 6 at or near flight mass, power, and volume for insertion into flight
missions. Throughout this process, the development philosophy of „build a little, test
a lot, and modify to improve performance‟ was utilized such that each Phase may
involve multiple generations of hardware and operations until key performance
parameters and mission requirements are met.
For ISRU to be successfully integrated into mission architecture plans, all the
steps required to achieve production of the final products need to be developed and
demonstrated. Using terrestrial mining philosophy as a starting point, NASA and the
Canadian Space Agency (CSA) have developed a Space ISRU „Mining‟ Cycle (see
Figure 1) to focus joint technology and integrated testing activities. The Space ISRU
Mining Cycle starts with first locating and characterizing potential resources at the
site of exploration from orbital and in-situ assets. These tasks should be planned and
performed in conjunction with Science organizations within space agencies since the
goals and objectives of science and resource assessment are very synergistic. With

this information, mining, site preparation, and processing systems and capabilities can
be implemented. Processing and product storage requirements also have to be
consistent with end „customer‟ product quality, form, and quantity needs.
Besides developing and demonstrating all the steps in ISRU to find and process
resources into useful products, it is important to understand and quantify the impact
of ISRU on exploration system requirements, hardware, and operations. Therefore,
efforts to link technology development and demonstration were made with surface
mobility, propulsion, power, life support, and cryogenic storage and management
projects within ETDP. A major emphasis was placed on the integration of fluid and
energy product and distribution cycles for ISRU, power, propulsion, and life support
systems, which is depicted in Figure 2.

Figure 1. Space ISRU Mining Cycle

Figure 2. Integrated ISRU-Power-Propulsion-Life Support
Fluid and Energy Cycles

LUNAR ISRU DEVELOPMENT ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN ETDP
During the five year existence of the ISRU Project in ETDP, significant
progress was made in the state of the art of lunar ISRU technologies, systems, and
capabilities. The ISRU Project raised the technology readiness level (TRL) of lunar
ISRU technologies and capabilities from a low of 1-2 for concept and laboratory
feasibility evaluation to a high of 4-5 for integrated system level tests and technology
operation under 1/6-g conditions during parabolic flights. Table 3 depicts the change
in TRL for technology and system development in the ISRU Project.
It would not be possible to list all of the models, hardware, testing and lessonslearned accomplishments that have occurred over the five years of the ISRU Project.
However the following are used to provide more insight into what was achieved
besides simply raising the TRL

Table 3. Lunar ISRU Technology Readiness Level Advancement in ETDP
TRL increase in ETDP
System Level
Lunar Volatile Characterization (RESOLVE)
H2 Reduction of Regolith
CH4 Reduction of Regolith
Molten Oxide Reduction of Regolith
Trash Processing for Water/Methane Production
Subsystem Level
Regolith Transfer & Handling
Regolith Transport Into/Out of Reactor
Beneficiation of Lunar Regolith
Size Sorting of Lunar Regolith
Oxygen Extraction From Regolith
H2 Reduction of Regolith Reactor
Gas/Water Separation & Cleanup
CH4 Reduction of Regolith Reactor
CH4 Reduction Methanation Reactor
MOE of Regolith Anode/Cathode
MOE of Regolith Molten Mat'l Removal
MOE Cell and Valving
Water/Fuel from Trash Processing
Trash Processing Reactor
In-Situ Energy Generation, Storage, and Transfer
Solar Thermal Energy for Regolith Reduction

At Start

At End

Delta

1
2-3
2-3
2
2

5
5
5
3
2-3

4
2-3
2-3
1
0-1

2
2-3
2-3

5
2-3
2-3

3
0-1
0-1

3
2
3
3-4
1-2
1-2
2-3

5
4-5
5
4-5
3-4
3
3

2
2-3
2
1-2
2-3
1-2
0-1

2

2-3

0-1

2

5

3

Lunar Polar Ice/Volatile Resource Characterization and Subscale ISRU
Demonstration
In 2005, the Regolith and Environment Science & Oxygen and Lunar Volatile
Extraction (RESOLVE) experiment development project was initiated to answer
questions about the type, amount, and location of possible resources of interest
(including water/ice) at the lunar poles, and to perform proof-of-concept and risk
reduction demonstrations if a robotic mission opportunity became available.
RESOLVE consists of a one meter coring drill that acquires subsurface regolith
(developed in conjunction with CSA). The core sample is transferred, divided into
individual segments, and each segment is examined for water/ice with a Raman or
Infrared (IR) spectrometer. Regolith samples from the core drill are then transferred
and heated in an oven in a step-wise manner to 150°C to measure the evolution of
volatiles with a mass spectrometer and gas chromatograph (MS/GC). The MS/GC is
designed to sense both solar wind volatiles like hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, etc. as
well as detect compounds like water, carbon monoxide, methane, or ammonia from
comets that might have been trapped in the permanently shadowed craters. Once the
volatile characterization portion of the experiment is complete, the oven‟s
temperature can be raised to over 800 °C and H2 gas is introduced to perform the H2
Reduction reaction. The water evolved from volatiles and produced in the hydrogen
reduction reaction is captured and viewed.
The RESOLVE project has taken a „generational‟ approach to develop hardware
toward a possible flight mission. A 1st generation engineering breadboard unit (EBU)
was built and laboratory tests were performed in 2007 to demonstrate the feasibility

and design features of the
hardware required to perform
these tasks. Once this was
completed, it was decided that a
2nd generation EBU was needed
to evaluate and demonstrate
both the end-to-end operations
required for a robotic mission
as well as the packaging
required to fit the hardware
onto a rover.
It was also
decided to combine the volatile
extraction
and
hydrogen
Figure 3. RESOLVE 3 rd Generation Design
reduction of regolith operations
in a single reactor versus the separate reactor/oven approach utilized in the
1st generation design [3]. This task was completed in November 2008 at a field test in
Hawaii (see 1st Lunar ISRU-Surface Operations Analog Field Test). The 2nd
generation EBU was ~100 kg in mass and required 200 to 300 watts of power. No
work was performed on miniaturizing the avionics and power conditioning
subsystems, and due to cost, flight weight valves and motors were not utilized. All
operational requirements for RESOLVE were met.
A 3rd generation of RESOLVE was started in June 2010 aimed at designing a
flight prototype that meets mission mass, power, and volume goals (<60 kg and 200
watts average) and operates under applicable lunar environment conditions. The
3rd generation of RESOLVE is being designed in two steps. Step 1 is a final
integrated unit for analog mission simulation field testing in 2012, and Step 2 is a
vacuum rated flight prototype scheduled for completion in 2014. Figure 3 depicts the
3rd Generation Step 1 design for RESOLVE [4] which recently completed its critical
design review (CDR).
Oxygen Extraction from Regolith
The ability to demonstrate the extraction and utilization of space resources for
future human exploration is a major objective and rationale for NASA‟s human
exploration of the Moon. Besides water, the next greatest resource of interest on the
Moon is oxygen. As stated previously, the Hydrogen (H2) Reduction process is the
simplest and least efficient of the three oxygen extraction from regolith techniques
examined. The ISRU Project initiated development of two lunar Outpost-scale H2
Reduction systems to allow comparison of different approaches for regolith feed and
removal, regolith mixing and heating with H2, water vapor removal and collection,
water electrolysis, and oxygen storage. The Lockheed Martin Astronautics (LMA)
Precursor ISRU Lunar Oxygen Testbed (PILOT) system, started in 2005, used a
„cement mixer‟ approach with a tumbling reactor to mix and heat the regolith (see
Figure 4c). The second concept, development by NASA, called ROxygen, used a
vertical reactor which incorporated both fluidization and an internal auger to stir and
heat the regolith (see Figure 4a). The purpose of these 1st generation hardware
designs was not to build a system that meets flight mass or power requirements, but

rather
was
intended to be
the first end-toend integration
and
test
of
excavation,
oxygen
production, and
product storage
in an automated
system
configuration at
a
relevant
(c)
mission
scale.
(a)
(b)
Both PILOT and
Figure 4. (a) ROxygen Gen I Reactor, (b) ROxygen Gen II Reactor,
ROxygen system
(c) PILOT rotating reactor
development
activities culminated with testing at an analog site in Hawaii in November 2008
(see 1st Lunar ISRU-Surface Operations Analog Field Test). For 1st generation
designs, the test results from PILOT and ROxygen were positive. Both reactors
evaluated production capabilities for various hydrogen flows and temperatures
(between 875 and 1050 °C), with oxygen extraction efficiencies around 1 to 2% by
mass (i.e. 1 to 2 kg of oxygen for every 100 kg of bulk regolith). Extraction
efficiency increased with increasing temperatures but regolith particle adhesion and
sintering begins to occur at temperatures above 1000 °C which begins to cause issues
with removing the material from the reactors after operations are completed [5].
Also, because both ROxygen and PILOT reactors proceed regolith batches which
were two orders of magnitude greater than previous laboratory reactor tests (10 kg vs
>80 gms), it was found that besides creating water from iron-oxide materials in the
regolith, hydrogen fluoride, hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen sulfide were also
created in parts per million concentrations from constituents in the lunar regolith
simulant. For long term operation and corrosion prevention, gas and water cleanup
systems needed to be designed to scrub these contaminants from the gas and water
products from the reactors. The PILOT reactor also included a regolith heat
exchanger to recuperate heat from processed regolith to the next incoming batch of
regolith, while time did not allow for a regolith heat exchange device for the
1st generation of ROxygen.
Based on the 1st generation system designs and results, a 2nd generation
ROxygen system based on utilizing pneumatic transport of regolith [6] and concentric
chambers for regolith heat exchange were incorporated to minimize issues in the 1st
generation ROxygen for mass, regolith valving, regolith transport, and heat
recuperation. Also, to increase oxygen extraction efficiency of the low performing H2
Reduction technique, a size sorting device was designed to increase fluidization and
reaction rates [7], and an mineral beneficiation device was designed using a combined
tribocharging/electrostatic separation technique to concentrate the iron-oxide in each
batch of regolith processed [8]. While proof-of-concept and subsystem tests in the

laboratory and on low-gravity parabolic flights were performed that showed all the
subsystems for the ROxygen II were meeting performance goals, the final ROxygen
Gen II system was not completed due to the cancellation of ETDP. Figure 4b shows
the ROxygen Gen II reactor design.
The Carbothermal Reduction process is a more efficient oxygen production
technique compared to H2 Reduction because not only will it reduce the iron oxide
but also some of the silicates found abundantly in the lunar regolith. However, the
process requires much higher temperatures (1800 °C) with the regolith becoming
molten. A main challenge for this approach is delivering the energy needed to form
the melt and developing techniques to deal with molten materials. Orbital
Technologies Incorporated (Orbitec) developed a Carbothermal Reduction system
under contract to LMA and NASA, and significant progress was made toward
tackling these challenges. The Orbitec Carbothermal Reduction system design
utilizes concentrated solar light channeled through fiber optic cables, development by
Physical Science Inc (PSI) through Phase II and Phase III SBIR contracts, to melt the
regolith and incorporates the ingenious concept of using the regolith‟s inherent
insulation properties to contain the localized melts (see Figure 5). Once the reduction
reaction is complete, the melts are allowed to cool, and once solid can be removed
from the regolith bed with an automatic rake mechanism, thereby avoiding reactor
wall material and molten material handling issues. The rake is then used to smooth
the bed and prepare it for the next batch of oxygen production. The combined PSI
solar concentrator system with Orbitec Carbothermal Reactor and NASA water
electrolysis system was integrated and tested in 2010 as part of the 2nd Lunar ISRUSurface Operation Analog Field Test [9,10].
Solar/Laser Ports
(single melt)
Radiation Reflector
Vertical Actuator
Loading Auger

Regolith Transfer Auger
to Fill Reactor Bed
Processed Regolith Melt

Rake
(Stowed)
Processed
Regolith
Exit Valve
Assembly

System Gas Bottle

Figure 5. Solar Concentrator (left); Carbothermal Reduction Reactor (right)

Regolith Excavation, Civil Engineering, and Surface Construction
When considering the Space ISRU Mining Cycle depicted in Figure 1, once
resources have been located, they need to be excavated and transferred to the
processing system for resource extraction. While there is tremendous terrestrial
mining experience to leverage, there are several significant challenges to excavating
and transferring regolith on the Moon. The first challenge is lunar regolith is made up
of extremely fine, hard, oddly shaped, and abrasive material. The second challenge is
the lunar environment which encompasses 1/6th Earth‟s gravity, vacuum, and extreme
temperature differences possible on the surface. The third challenge is mass and

power are limited compared to terrestrial applications. All of these challenges
combined raise significant issues with equipment life as well as the excavation and
flow of granular material under these environmental conditions.
Before the ISRU Project initiated any efforts to design and build 1st generation
excavation or area clearing implements, it was decided that basic research and models
would be developed on regolith behavior, flow, and granular material/implement
interaction to anchor 1st generation hardware design and performance evaluation.
Early in the project, a replica of the Surveyor spacecraft excavator from the Apollo
program was recreated and tested in the laboratory to help anchor these models.
Subsequent tests were also performed on blades, bucketwheels, and scoop excavators
in prepared regolith bins at the Glenn Research Center (GRC) (see Figure 6). At the
same time, work
was initiated on
analytical
and
Discrete Element
Method
(DEM)
computer models
of regolith granular
material behavior
Figure 6. Laboratory Testing of Excavation & Area Clearing Implements
[11,12].
There is a general misconception based on artistic representations of lunar
ISRU systems, that large excavators are required. Based on excavation models as
well as work on oxygen extraction from regolith techniques, it was determined that
very small excavators could be utilized to meet the oxygen production needs of 1000
to 10,000 kg per year for early human lunar mission concepts. Based on the lowest
performing oxygen extraction from regolith technique (H2 Reduction), excavators
only have to excavate a soccer field sized area 8 cm deep over 1 year to produce
10,000 kg of oxygen. This fact, associated with the desire to minimize excavator
mass and power and dispel misconception of ISRU system size, the ISRU Project and
external developers focused on designing and build small excavator concept vehicles.
Two separate small excavator concept vehicles were designed, built, and tested
in 2007-08. One concept, known as „Cratos‟, was built by GRC and tested under
controlled laboratory and field test conditions. Cratos weighed about 80 kg, is a little
under a meter square, and can deliver an average load of 23 kg of regolith per trip to
the oxygen production system‟s regolith hopper. The second demonstration unit,
known as the bucketdrum excavator, was designed and built under IR&D by LMA in
Denver. While the bucketdrum mobility platform was not designed for actual lunar
surface conditions, the bucketdrum demonstrated excellent excavation and material
transport capabilities for minimal mass and power. The bucketdrum could excavate
~18 kg in 3 minutes. To produce 1000 kg of oxygen using the H2 Reduction
technique, based on an average load of 20 kg (which either concept vehicle could
provide), a small excavator would only need to make twelve excavation runs per day
to harvest the necessary regolith. Since this can easily be accomplished by these
concept vehicles in just a few hours per day, the concept vehicles provided an
important visual understanding to mission planners that ISRU infrastructure to
support human lunar missions does not have to be massive. Figure 7 depicts the

Figure 7. Cratos Excavator (left); Bucketdrum Excavator (middle), LANCE on Chariot (right)

Cratos and Bucketdrum excavators during a field test in Hawaii.
From terrestrial mining experience, civil engineering tasks such as building
roads between excavation sites and processing systems, can be very important to
minimize vehicle maintenance and travel time. Also, mining infrastructure placement
and operations for buildings, helipads, and logistic depots require civil engineering
and area clearing capabilities. As shown in the Space ISRU Mining Cycle, site
preparation capabilities for road construction, outpost infrastructure placement, and
cleared areas for lunar landers are expected to be needed for future human lunar
missions. Unlike excavation for oxygen extraction from regolith, should site
preparation/civil engineering tasks be undertaken, substantially more lunar regolith
must be moved and handled in a shorter period of time to clear areas for landing pads
and roads and build berms for landing plume mitigation. Also, these tasks may
require excavation below the loosely consolidated top material and the removal and
handling of rocks. ISRU Project personnel at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in
collaboration with the Human Robotic System (HRS) Project in ETDP developed a
“bulldozer” blade, called LANCE (Lunar Attachment Node for Construction and
Excavation) that could be used to move large amounts of soil and be attached to the
HRS „Chariot‟ crew rover. This proof-of-concept project was intended to be a final
design for the architecture, but rather an opportunity for two ETDP projects to begin
to work together and understand the integration and operation issues for site
preparation implements attached to a mobility platform. Because autonomous blade
control software was not developed for this effort, performance of the LANCE blade
was strongly influenced by the controller‟s manual abilities to control the blade
before wheel slippage occurred. Figure 7 depicts the LANCE blade attached to the
Chariot rover during field test operations at Moses Lake in 2008 [13].
ISRU Development Support
As stated previously, development of lunar ISRU technologies and capabilities is
only as good as the simulants used to test the feasibility and performance of the ISRU
processes being developed. While it was recognized that JSC-1 was a reasonable
physical and mineral simulant for early feasibility development efforts, it fell short of
actual lunar regolith in several physical and mineral characteristics that are important
for understanding regolith flow and life/abrasion as well as energy and reaction rates
for oxygen extraction. To overcome these deficiencies, the MSFC with support from
the US Geological Survey and Zybek Advanced Products created a series of lunar
highland simulants known as NU-LHT (for NASA-US Geological Survey Lunar
Highland Type). This simulant series includes more realistic particle size/shape
distributions, glasses and agglutinate material, and mineral feedstock in comparison

to previously developed lunar simulants [14]. The primary drawback to LHT lunar
simulants have been the cost and small amount of simulant produced to date.
To minimize ISRU system mass and power, ISRU systems are designed to be
pre-deployed and operate for long periods of time on planetary surfaces before crew
arrive. To understand life issues and verify performance and operation before flight,
the ISRU Project planned on utilizing a combination of laboratory, analog field test,
and environment/vacuum simulation chambers during development of ISRU
technologies and capabilities. At the start of the ISRU Project, no vacuum chamber
existed inside or outside of NASA that could simulate lunar environmental conditions
(vacuum, temperature, and solar) with regolith in the chamber. Early work by
Lockheed Martin with IR&D showed that it was possible to have a vacuum chamber
with regolith but that the regolith continued to outgas upon agitation. Also, the
regolith impacts the operation of thermal control and vacuum facility hardware. A
series of tests were planned to incrementally increase the understanding of the issues
and challenges of setting up a large simulant bed inside a vacuum chamber and
operating the environment simulation chamber for extended periods of time. These
tests, performed at JSC and GRC, included permeability, facility component
protection, soil drying and compaction, soil bed characterization methods and
instruments, and controlled moisture dosing techniques. One set of tests examining
regolith dust buildup in roughing and diffusion pump oil showed that 2 to 3 gms of
dust were added to the oil and that in-line filtration would be required for long
duration tests. Tests are currently being performed at GRC on evaluating soil
compaction techniques to prepare regolith beds before and after vacuum conditions
have been achieved in the chamber [15].

Figure 8. RESOLVE/Scarab (left), ROxygen System (middle); PILOT system (right)

1st Lunar ISRU-Surface Operations Analog Field Test
A major impediment to incorporating ISRU capabilities into lunar architecture
plans has been the fact that ISRU systems have not been demonstrated either at a
complete system level or out of the laboratory. To begin to remove this impediment,
the purpose of the first ISRU-Surface Operations Analog Field Test was to (i)
perform the first end-to-end test of excavation, oxygen production, and product
storage in an integrated system configuration at a relevant scale for future human
lunar missions, (ii) demonstrate prototype hardware and operations associated with
mobile resource prospecting to prove the feasibility for a future lunar polar mission,
and (iii) develop partnerships with international space agencies and Hawaii. The first
analog field test was performed in November 2008 on Mauna Kea in Hawaii to
coincide with the Japan US Science, Technology, & Space Applications Program
(JUSTSAP) conference.

To support the analog field test goals and objectives, three major ISRU systems
were developed by NASA and industry/academia partners; a roving lunar polar
resource characterization system called RESOLVE/Scarab, and two H2 Reduction
from regolith systems; ROxygen and PILOT (see Figure 8). The CSA provided
support to the RESOLVE/Scarab system for sample acquisition, drill site selection,
and nighttime navigation as well as providing on-site and satellite communication
between Hawaii and the mainland for the analog field test effort. The German Space
Agency (DLR) also participated in the field test by testing their lunar mole prototypes
and a Mossbauer spectrometer for mineral evaluation before and after oxygen
extraction processing.
For
ISRU
capabilities to be
integrated
into
future
space
missions, all of the
steps in the Space
ISRU Mining Cycle
need
to
be
considered
and
verified. While not
demonstrating
product storage and
utilization due to
schedule issues in
development, the
1st ISRU-Surface Figure 9. Hardware and Participants in the 1st ISRU-Surface Operation
Operations analog Analog Field Test
field test was a
major success in that it succeeded in demonstrating for the first time the Space ISRU
Mining Cycle (see Figure 9) even if all hardware operations were not achieved. The
field test was the first demonstration of lunar ISRU end-to-end operations at mission
relevant scales. The ROxygen system produced oxygen at a 660 kg/year rate and the
PILOT system produced oxygen at a 250 kg/year rate (initial lunar outpost needs
were estimated to be 1000 kg/year). The PILOT system completed 6 reactor
operations and produced 1000 ml of water from iron-oxide in the local volcanic
tephra material while the ROxygen system completed 5 reactor operations. The
RESOLVE/Scarab system completed 6 core sample drillings, 6 sample volatile
characterizations, and 4 oxygen extraction from regolith operations [16,17,18,19].
Since the gas/water cleanup system for ROxygen and PILOT had not been adequately
tested and verified before the field test, neither ISRU system electrolyzed the water
produced from the local tephra material. All systems in ROxygen and PILOT were
operated successfully with deionized water, and post test analysis of the water
produced from tephra after passing through the water cleanup system confirmed that
the cleaning technique developed was successful. All in all, 5 NASA centers, 2
international space agencies, 7 companies, and 2 universities participated in the
analog field test.

2nd Lunar ISRU-Surface Operations Analog Field Test
Even before the 1st Lunar ISRU-Surface Operations analog field test was
completed, development of improved and 2nd generation hardware was already
underway for subsequent testing. Because of the success in testing ISRU capabilities,
demonstrating the major steps in the Space ISRU Mining Cycle, and involving
international, industry, and academic partners at the first analog field test, it was
decided to increase the scope and complexity of the next analog field test. With this
in mind, NASA and CSA directed efforts for the second ISRU and Lunar Surface
Operations analog field test to (i) advance ISRU hardware and systems demonstrated
over 1st analogue field test,
(ii) expand ISRU system/capability integration with
other transportation and surface elements (such as power and propulsion) and science
activities, and (iii) increase the scope and criticality of international partner
involvement in ISRU development and demonstration. The 2nd Lunar ISRU-Surface
Operations
analog field test
was performed in
January
and
February of 2010
at
the
same
location
on
Mauna Kea in
Hawaii as the
first field test,
and
involved
demonstrating
instruments,
hardware,
and
operations in all
steps of the Space
ISRU
Mining
Figure 10. Space Mining Cycle Hardware Integration and Operation in the
Cycle.
This
2 nd ISRU-Surface Operation Analog Field Test
included testing
an upgraded RESOLVE lunar polar resource characterization package on a CSA
provided rover [20] and other science instruments provided by CSA and NASA‟s
Moon Mars Analog Mission Activity (MMAMA), an integrated Carbothermal
reduction of regolith production system with solar concentrator regolith heating,
water electrolysis, liquid oxygen/ methane storage, and liquid oxygen/methane
thruster. The NASA ISRU hardware was powered by a CSA provided fuel cell. Site
preparation tasks were performed by NASA and CSA demonstrations of autonomous
landing pad, road, and berm building capabilities along with solar concentrator and
resistive heating surface sintering (see Figure 10).
The 2nd ISRU-Surface Operation analog field test was considered even more
successful than the first field test. In this field tests, all aspects of ISRU and lunar
surface system integration were tested in an end-to-end manor, which led to it being
referred to as „Dust to Thrust‟ [21]. This including autonomous/tele-operation of a
Load-Haul-Dump rover excavator (CSA provided) [22], extracting 28 gms of oxygen

from the local tephra using the more efficient Carbothermal reduction processing
technique (9.6% ave. yield) in 12 operations (NASA provided) [23], electrolyzing
water produced from the tephra and fuel cell power system (NASA provided),
transferring and liquefying oxygen in a cryocart (NASA provided), sintering surface
pads using two different methods (CSA and NASA provided), and firing a liquid
oxygen/methane thruster (with oxygen produced in-situ) onto unprepared and sintered
surfaces to evaluate plume effects on the surface (NASA provided). As depicted in
Figure 2, the 2nd ISRU-Surface Operation analog field test also strived to close the
propulsion and ISRU-power cycles with the production and storage of hydrogen and
oxygen (NASA and CSA provided) from the water electrolyzer being used in a fuel
cell (CSA provided) [24] to power the rover excavator, and oxygen produced being
used in the thruster firings. By closing both the propulsion and power system cycles,
the field test successfully demonstrated integration of ISRU and
surface/transportation elements. More importantly, hardware from both CSA and
NASA was required to successfully close the ISRU-Power and ISRU-Propulsion
cycles, thereby meeting the programmatic objective of demonstrating international
partnerships in mission critical operations. All in all 6 NASA centers, 3 Canadian
government agencies, 14 small businesses, and 7 universities participated in the 2nd
analog field test.
CONCLUSION
Incorporation of ISRU and the production of mission critical consumables for
propulsion, power, and life support into mission architectures can greatly reduce the
mass, cost, and risk of missions leading to a sustainable and affordable approach to
human exploration beyond Earth. ISRU and its products can also greatly affect how
other exploration systems are developed, including determining which technologies
are important or enabling. While the concept of lunar ISRU has existed for over 40
years, the technologies and systems had not progressed much past simple laboratory
proof-of-concept tests. With the release of the Vision for Space Exploration in 2004
with the goal of harnessing the Moon‟s resources, NASA initiated the ISRU Project
in the Exploration Technology Development Program to develop the technologies and
systems needed to meet this goal. In the five years of work in the ISRU Project,
significant advancements and accomplishments occurred in several important areas of
lunar ISRU. Also, two analog field tests held in Hawaii in 2008 and 2010
demonstrated all the steps in ISRU capabilities required along with the integration of
ISRU products and hardware with propulsion, power, and cryogenic storage systems.
These end-to-end demonstrates were performed at relevant human missions scales
show that incorporation of lunar ISRU into mission plans is achievable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge all of the men and women in NASA,
industry (both US and international), academia, and partnering space agencies for all
of the hard work and dedication that went into turning lunar ISRU concepts into
reality. It is because of their efforts that ISRU is now more than just „viewgraph‟
engineering.

REFERENCES
[1] Lunar Sourcebook a user‟s guide to the moon, edited by Grant Heiken, David
Vaniman, and Bevan French, Lunar Planetary Institute
[2] Data obtained from Tony Colaprete, Principle Investigator for the Lunar Crater
Observation & Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) mission.
[3] Julie Kleinhenz, Zengguang Yuan, John Caruso, and Kurt Sacksteder,
“Development of a Reactor for the Extraction of Oxygen and Volatiles from
Lunar Regolith”, 47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan.
2009.
[4] William Larson, Martin Picard, Gerald Sanders, Anthony Colaprete, and Richard
Elphic, “RESOLVE: Ground Truth for Polar Lunar Volatiles as a Resource”,
62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA, Oct. 2011.
[5] Larry Clark, “Precursor In-Situ Lunar Oxygen Testbed (PILOT) Hawaii Field
Testing Nov 2008”, Panel Presentation, AIAA Space 2009, Pasadena, CA., Sept.
2009
[6] Edgardo Santiago-Maldonado, James Mantovani, and Jesus Dominguez,
“Experimental Testing and Modeling of a Pneumatic Regolith Delivery System
for ISRU”, Presentation at Planetary and Terrestrial Mining and Sciences
Symposium (PTMSS), Ottawa, Canada, June, 2011.
[7] Allen Wilkinson, “Size Beneficiation of Regolith for Simplicity and Efficiency”,
Presentation at Planetary and Terrestrial Mining and Sciences Symposium
(PTMSS), Ottawa, Canada, June, 2011.
[8] Steve Trigwell, James Captain, Ellen Arens, et. al., “The Use of Tribotcharging in
the Electrostatic Beneficiation of Lunar Simulant”, IEEE Transactions on Industry
Application, Vol. 45, No. 3, May/June 2009.
[9] Brant White, Robert Gustafson, and Michael Fidler, “2010 Field Demonstration
of the Solar Carbothermal Regolith Reduction Process to Produce Oxygen”, 49th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL,
Jan. 2011
[10] T. Nakamura and B. Smith, “Solar Thermal Power System for Lunar ISRU
Applications: Development and Field Operation at Mauna Kea, HI”, AIAA 49th
Aerospace Science Meeting, Orlando FL, Jan. 2011.
[11] Diane Linne, Christopher Gallo, Aaron Joseph, “Preliminary Trade Study on
Scoop Size for large Excavation Vehicle”, Presentation at Planetary and
Terrestrial Mining and Sciences Symposium (PTMSS), Toronto, Canada, June,
2009.
[12] Christopher Gallo, “A Comparison Between the NORCAT Rover Test Results
and the ISRU Excavation System Model Predictions”, Presentation at Planetary
and Terrestrial Mining and Sciences Symposium (PTMSS), Ottawa, Canada,
June, 2011.
[13] Robert Mueller, Allen Wilkinson, Christoper Gallo, et. al., “Lightweight
Bulldozer Attachment for Construction and Excavation on the Lunar Surface”,
AIAA Space 2009, Pasadena, CA., Sept. 2009.

[14] Diane Linne, “Requirements and Progress Towards a Planetary Surface
Simulation Facility”, Presentation at Planetary and Terrestrial Mining and
Sciences Symposium (PTMSS), Ottawa, Canada, June, 2011.
[15] D. Stoeser, S. Wilson, and D. Rickman, “Design and Specifications for the
Highland Regolith Prototype Simulants NU-LHT-1M and -2M”, NASA/TM2010-216438, August, 2010.
[16] Robert P. Mueller and Ivan Townsend, “Lunar Regolith Simulant Feed
System for a Hydrogen Reduction Reactor System”, 47th AIAA Aerospace
Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 2009.
[17] Gerald B. Sanders, William E. Larson, Thomas Simon, et. al., “NASA In-Situ
Resource Utilization Program”, AIAA 2009-0412, 47th AIAA Aerospace
Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 2009.
[18] Julie Kleinhenz, Zengguang Yuan, John Caruso, and Kurt Sacksteder,
“Development of a Reactor for the Extraction of Oxygen and Volatiles from
Lunar Regolith”, 47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan.
2009.
[19] Anthony C. Muscatello, “Lunar Water Resource Demonstration (LWRD)”,
47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 2009.
[20] Janine Captain, “RESOLVE 2010 Field Test”, Space Resources RoundtablePlanetary and Terrestrial Mining and Sciences Symposium (SRR-PTMSS),
Golden, CO., June, 2010.
[21] Sanders, Gerald, Larson, William, “Integration of In-Situ Resource Utilization
Into Lunar/Mars Exploration Through Field Analogs”, 38th COSPAR Scientific
Assembly, Bremen, Germany, July 2010.
[22] Dale S. Boucher, J Tom Atwell, Ronny Theiss, “Development and Testing of an
Autonomous Regolith Excavation and Delivery System”, 49th AIAA Aerospace
Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 2011.
[23] Brant White, Robert Gustafson, and Michael Fidler, “2010 Field Demonstration
of the Solar Carbothermal Regolith Reduction Process to Produce Oxygen”, 49th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 2011.
[24] Jim Richard, Ravi Gopal, Dale S. Boucher and Ronny Theiss, “Fuel Cell
Integration to a Mobility Platform”, 49th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Orlando, FL, Jan. 2011.

