Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

Space Exploration Through Self-Replication
Technology Compensates for Discounting
in Net Present Value Cost-Benefit Analysis:
A Business Case?
A. Alex Ellery
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Canada.

ABSTRACT
Self-replication technology is a little known technology that is
currently under development and that has enormous implications for affordable space exploration. In particular, the prospect
of 3D printing of actuators and electronics offers the prospect of
realizing a universal constructor, which is the basis of a selfreplicating machine. The universal constructor is a generalpurpose automated factory that is supported by a number of
robotic devices. If programmed appropriately, it can manufacture
a copy of itself (as well as other products). We present an
overview of self-replication research and its application to colonization of the Moon at very low cost—it offers a means to
overcome the high cost of launch through exponential exploitation of in situ resources. Combined with in situ resource utilization, a universal constructor can construct (in theory) almost
any product within certain constraints. Indeed, its productivity
dwarfs any potential cost reductions in launch costs. We shall
focus on defining several critical technological developments. It
has potential commercial applications in extremely low-cost
manufacturing of solar power satellites for clean energy production for the Earth. Self-replication capability offers a mechanism for offsetting discounting of future revenue (as computed
by net present value cost-benefit analysis) by generating exponentially increasing revenue over time. It represents a ‘‘Bold’’ (as
advocated by Peter Diamandis) approach for a start-up company,
toward which steps are being taken. These steps will be discussed in detail. However, the revolutionary economics will make
it challenging to attract capital investment despite eliminating
the discounting effect. Nevertheless, a business case can be
made despite a long-time horizon of investment due to nu-

merous progressive spin-off applications. Over the long term,
self-replication technology could revolutionize space exploration
by providing for remote construction of complete (although
simple) spacecraft in large numbers from in situ resources. By
virtue of this massive productive capacity offered by selfreplication technology, missions that are currently considered
too expensive or impractical become feasible, for example,
space-based geoengineering, asteroid exploitation and/or mitigation, and difficult outer planet locations such as Enceladus,
interstellar precursor missions, etc.
Keywords: self-replicating machines, in situ resource utilization, universal constructor, robotic planetary infrastructure

INTRODUCTION

I

believe that the space sector is mired in a rut that it has
inherited from its historical origins in the Cold War space
race. Its philosophy is based on racing—its race to the
Moon has colored its subsequent mission goals such as
racing to Mars or racing to the Moon on steroids. Only recently
has the landscape included major commercial players. Entrepreneurial space activities have been very active of late, the
most visible of which is SpaceX—SpaceX’s main customer is,
of course, NASA. Other players include Virgin Galactic, Astrobotic, Planetary Resources, Made-in-Space, etc. In fact,
such entrepreneurial ventures were discouraged by NASA in
earlier days. Further, the racing philosophy has failed to open
up the space environment to ordinary folk who might wish to
exploit it as a business opportunity—we live in a world of
shopkeepers, after all, who seek only opportunities to improve
their lot. According to the British Government, space is one of
the ‘‘Eight Great Technologies’’ (David Willetts MP, Policy
Exchange, London, 2013). As such it should contribute to the
human condition in a substantial way. I am not referring to
the dreaming spires of pioneering rockets in space or the
self-conscious ‘‘overview effect’’ described by Frank White.

Manuscript presented at the 67th International Astronautical Congress, Guadalajara, Mexico, September 26–30, 2016. Copyright ª 2017 by A. Alex Ellery.

DOI: 10.1089/space.2017.0017

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017 NEW SPACE

141

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

Although I am sympathetic to these notions, they have been a
hindrance by elevating space exploration for the preservation
of the technological and scientific priesthood. I wish to
transform space exploration into something totally unrecognizable by opening up the space environment with near-zero
cost access for ordinary folk with ideas on how to make a
buck. In situ resource utilization avoids the requirement for
the expensive launch of such resources from the Earth’s surface. However, it is only a modest step—a fully manufactured
infrastructure requires considerable capital delivery and installation. Self-replication technology is an entirely disruptive
technology that offers the opportunity to revolutionize all
industrial and domestic activity, especially in the space environment. Inherent in self-replication technology is the idea
that there are no fundamental limits on upward human
progress and growth. Self-replication effectively amortizes
initial capital costs over an effectively infinite productive
capacity ceteris paribus. Its exponential increase in productive
capacity provides enormous opportunities for the construction of infrastructure in space to drive business opportunity.
The construction of infrastructure is the key to the robust
development of the space environment to enable both commercial and government activity at low cost.

THE POWER OF SELF-REPLICATION
Net present value (NPV) cost-benefit analysis is an oft-used
analytical tool for assessing the relative merits of competing
investment projects in terms of the return on investment. It
typically has an S shape representing the initial costs of investment followed by the gradual accumulation of revenue

Fig. 1. Typical NPV curve1—$M versus years. NPV, net present value.

142 NEW SPACE 2017

until pure profit is realized. By projecting into the future, the
discount rate ensures the approach to saturation, which also
reflects future obsolescence (Fig. 1). NPV is given by:
n

N = + (1 N+ir)i ,

(1)

i=0

where N = B-C, B = revenue, C = cost, r = discount rate,
i = discrete time (years), and n = project duration. This assumes
that the benefits and costs can be measured. NPV cost-benefit
analysis penalizes long-term projects whose benefits are difficult to measure by using the accountant’s limited set of tools,
that is, investment decisions are made on the basis of ignorance. All else are lumped as externalities. This is the assertion
of the cynic over the sentimentalist in Oscar Wilde’s play Lady
Windermere’s Fan who knows the price of everything but the
value of nothing. It has now become more fashionable to
incorporate harmful effects such as pollution into cost-benefit
analysis. NPV cost-benefit analysis stands as the primary tool
of the bean-counter.
There is uncertainty associated with cost-benefit computations because the future is dark and unpredictable—this is
the purpose of discounting.2 Of course, much depends on the
numerical value of the discount rate r, which dramatically
affects the net benefit-cost computed. Much argumentation
revolves around the selection of the appropriate value. As a
benchmark, over the past 50 years, the average return on investments has been 10%. However, competition for investment such as hedge funds and other financial instruments
offers higher rates of return.
After World War II, national defense became heavily reliant
on advanced technology funded by government programs
(including the space program). This was supported by the
Keynesian economic model of economics—social security
payments cushion the fall in consumer spending, whereas
infrastructure investment stimulates economic growth. Similarly, governments can alleviate the investment requirement of projects and increase profits to the private sector
by providing initial seed funding, particularly for basic
and applied research and development (Fig. 2). Apple received
a business development grant of $500,000 during its early
days (yet today, it pays marginal tax in return). Innovation
in the private sector has often been driven primarily by government support of infrastructure technology—both internet
and GPS were military research projects before being co-opted
for civil use.
However, the discount effect is still apparent, even with
initial government funding. Cost-benefit analysis generally
refers to a single project involving an initial investment followed by a revenue stream that is progressively discounted

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

Fig. 3. Exponential productive capacity of self-replication—
population versus generation.

Fig. 2. NPV curve with government seed funding1—$M versus
years.

into the future. The limitation is that a fixed capacity generates a fixed revenue stream. A self-replicating machine,
however, overcomes this limitation through its exponential
growth in capacity. The productive capacity of a selfreplicating population has a similar form to NPV cost-benefit
analysis and is given by:
m

P = + (1 + r)i ,

(2)

i=1

where r = number of offspring per generation, i = generation
number, and m = number of generations. The discount rate in
NPV cost-benefit analysis is typically 0 < r < 1; whereas in a
self-replicating machine, the number of offspring per generation, r ‡ 1. For instance, if r = 2 and m = 13, P > 2 · 106, that is,
the power of self-replication yields exponential growth in
production.
An initial capital outlay for the initial self-replicating machine yields a productive capacity that grows exponentially
(Fig. 3). This capacity growth of self-replication outpaces the
accumulated penalty in NPV cost-benefit analysis. The beancounter has finally been slain! Further, obsolescence is alien
to self-replicating systems in a very real sense. Modifications
or upgrades may simply be uploaded to old self-replicators
to produce the new upgraded versions—no upgraded machines
need be supplied, so no further capital costs are incurred.

SELF-REPLICATING MACHINES
Much of the theoretical background to self-replicating
machines is given in Ref.3 The self-replicating machine con-

cept as developed by John von Neumann was based on the
Universal Constructor, a machine that if given the appropriate
resources can construct anything (within the bounds of reason). This includes a copy of itself, ergo, a self-replicating
machine. The self-replicating machine comprises two core
systems—a generalized robotic mechanism and a universal
computer to control it. Self-replication is a disruptive technology with many spin-offs on the way to its realization. The
most fundamental components for any robot are electric
motors and electronic controllers. Such robots include rovers
for mobility, 3D printers for manufacturing, manipulators for
assembly, or a combination thereof (such as Fig. 4).
Many of the technical issues involved in designing a selfreplicating machine using in situ lunar resources are outlined
in Ref.4 The Moon has almost all the extractable resources
required to build a self-replicating machine, including structures, electric motors, and electronics (Table 1).
Although much of the required material can be extracted
from surface lunar regolith, some require access to subsurface
NiFe asteroid material marked by mascons. Specific issues
related to lunar mining are addressed in Ref.5 The processing
and purification processes required are also addressed in these
papers. From these materials, a variety of 3D printing techniques may be employed—fused deposition modeling (FDM)
for silicone plastic, electron beam freeform fabrication
(EBF3) for metals, and selective light sintering (SLS) for ceramics. The focus of my work has been in 3D printing of
electric motors as a critical step toward self-replication. Early
work in 3D printing electric motors is described in Refs.6,7
Since then, several new motors have been developed that
incorporate 3D-printed features. A test setup has been built
to test direct current (DC) motors that incorporate 3D-printed
motor cores comprising magnetic iron particles impregnating
a plastic matrix extruded by FDM (Fig. 5).

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 143

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

We have not yet demonstrated
3D printing of electronics, but
we have been exploring a computational architecture based
on analogue neural networks
(implementable using vacuum
tubes) that is potentially 3D
printable from the material set in
Table 19 (Fig. 10).
A two-analogue neuron circuit
has been demonstrated as implementing obstacle avoidance
on a desktop rover. An analogue
neural network control circuit
has been developed as a backup
to a satellite control system to
automatically implement safe
mode.10 It uses sun sensor meaFig. 4. Mobile rovers 3D printing regolith on the Moon [credit European Space Agency].
surements to activate the neurocontrol circuit independently of
the onboard computer to orient the spacecraft to a deadband
A pancake motor has been developed with a 3D-printed
support structure using wire coils on the armature (Fig. 6).
around the sun axis if the spacecraft veers away from it. Each
The wire coils of the pancake motors have been replaced by
neuron is inhibitory, comprising a summing differentiator
amplifier with an input time delay followed by a bistable
photolithographically printed coils on the armature8 (Figs. 7
and 8).
Schmitt trigger comparator. The two-neuron network is
connected in series so that the output of one neuron feeds into
The next stage involves sandwiching the photolithography
printed coils and incorporating them into the earlier DC motor
the input of the other, which is different to our parallel twoneuron connection arrangement. Issues related to 3D printing
designs. This will yield the first, fully 3D-printed electric
motor. Then work can begin tackling reducing or eliminating
electronics in the form of analogue neural networks are addressed in Ref.11 Any neuron is characterized by a constant
the manual assembly process by using new designs. Although
most of this work has concentrated on using FDM to print
probability of failure. To emulate n perfect neurons, we need
metal-impregnated plastic, it is anticipated that this work will
O(nlogn) redundancy in unreliable neurons to compute the
be extended to metal printing, including EBF3 and SLS. Alsame function. Hence, there is low growth in circuit comthough 3D-printed motors can be tailored to specific appliplexity in implementing reliability in neural networks. The
cations, competing with the traditional motor industry is
leaky integrate-and-fire neuron offers the possibility of stounlikely to be successful except in niche applications. In
chastic resonance for the extraction of signals buried in
particular, it is expected that their performance will initially
noise.12 Appendix considers the use of neural networks for
be inferior to traditional off-the-shelf motors that have
artificial intelligence requirements that are imposed by a
benefited from a century of accumulated wisdom. One niche
self-replicating machine. The implementation of artificial
application would be incorporating 3D-printed reaction
intelligence in neural networks, in general, is reviewed in
wheels in 3D-printed cubesat-like spacecraft such as might
Ref.13 The prospects for deep learning in hardware neural
be inspired by the EyasSat spacecraft model (Fig. 9). One of
networks are promising14—once learning is complete, the
the products of the self-replicating machine is a spacecraft
neural network configuration and weights are fixed suitably
and indeed, all the subsystems required for a spacecraft are
for implementation in hardware.
those required by a self-replicating machine. Such 3D-printed
We have, thus, considered the two core components of
spacecraft, including motors, may be printed on demand
a self-replicating machine—actuators and electronics. The
on the International Space Station (ISS) from an inventory of
ability to 3D print electric motors and electronics will represtored raw materials offering the capabilities of actively
sent a major leap toward realization of a self-replicating
controlled attitude control and slewing.
machine. In a naı̈ve sense, this is obvious if we take the

144 NEW SPACE 2017

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

Table 1. Lunar Material and Their Functionality
Functionality
Tensile structures

Traditional Earth Materials
Aluminum alloy, iron alloys (steel),

Lunar Substitutes

Applications

Wrought iron, cast iron, steel

General structures, including vehicles

Wrought iron, cast iron, steel

Buildings/fixed infrastructure

Iron alloy springs/flexures,

Compliant structures

titanium alloy, plastic, composite materials
Compressive structures As above plus concrete/cement
Elastic structures

Metal springs/flexures, rubber

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

silicone elastomers
Thermal conductors

Aluminum, copper, heat pipes

Steel, fernico

Thermal straps, radiator surfaces

Thermal insulation

Glass (fiber), ceramic

Glass (fiber), ceramic

Thermal isolation

Thermal tolerance

Tungsten, tantalum

Tungsten

Vacuum tube electrodes, high-temperature crucibles

Electrical conduction

Aluminum, copper, nickel

Fernico (e.g., kovar), nickel

Electrical wiring, resistors, capacitors,
inductor coils, motor coils, electromagnet coils

Electrical insulation

Glass, ceramic, plastic, silicon steel

Glass, ceramic, silicone plastic

Vacuum tube enclosures, ceramic plates

(to be minimized), silicon steel

(motor cores and capacitors), plastic sheathing,
electric motor cores

Active electronics

Solid state

Vacuum tubes (kovar, nickel,

Computer architectures

tungsten, glass)
Magnetic materials

Sensors and sensory

Rare earth materials (permanent

Silicon steel/laminate

magnets) supermalloy

(electromagnets) permalloy

Magnetic flux generation (motors), magnetic shielding

PVDF/PZT, PN junction semiconductors

Quartz, selenium, thermionic conversion Radio-frequency oscillators, electricity generation,

transduction

optical vacuum tubes (photodiodes/photomultipliers)

Optical structures

Polished aluminum glass

Polished nickel, glass

Mirrors, lenses, optical fibers

Liquids

Hydrocarbon oils water

Silicone oils, water (to be minimized)

Lubricants, hydraulic force transmission (e.g.,
hot isostatic pressing), coolant

Gases

Air—petrol/paraffin

Oxygen—hydrogen

RepRap 3D printer as our representative model. It is capable of
printing its own plastic parts. To become fully self-replicating
(from feedstock), it must be imparted with the ability to print
its metal components (implementable through EBF3 based on
a high-power vacuum tube), its electric motors (it is essentially
a Cartesian robot), its electronics (vacuum tubes in neural net
configurations can realize general computing capabilities),
and its energy source (vacuum tube-based thermionic conversion generates electrical energy from solar sources, and
motorized flywheels implement power storage). Manufacture
of feedstock from lunar resources is more challenging but
essentially requires rover vehicles with articulated manipulator scoops and/or bucket wheels—these are essentially
robotic devices, again, configurations of motors controlled by
electronic circuits. We estimate 6 years to a working prototype
that is similar to the RepRap based on our 3D metal printer

Oxidant—propellant

under development. Development of a flight version over 2–3
years is typical for a planetary rover; our Kapvik micro-rover
(including its onboard intelligence using commercial off-theshelf systems) was developed from concept to pre-flight
version within 2.5 years, including its test campaign. The upcoming lunar Resource Prospector mission will demonstrate
some of the basic in situ resource utilization techniques that are
required to extract feedstock from lunar resources. Once a
single fully self-replicating machine has been emplaced on the
Moon, the mathematics of self-replication (eq. 2) dictates that
within 6 years, the order of a million units will have been
manufactured assuming a generation time of 6 months.

IS THERE A BUSINESS CASE?
What are the prospects for success? Not all technological
investments have been successful. Research and development

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 145

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

Fig. 5. Direct current motors with 3D-printed motor cores of plastic
impregnated with iron particles.

is the primary source of scientific and technological innovation, but it is risky and expensive. The supersonic Concorde
aeroplane was enormously successful technologically but was
an abject failure financially. Early gene therapies were failures, and stem cell research has been plagued with scandals.
More recently, the Human Brain Project has been a fiasco.
Self-replicating machine development does not suffer from
the ambiguity and the complexities that are inherent in biological research. Self-replication technology is a generalpurpose technology that is characterized by its potential for
pervasiveness in downstream industries such as manufacturing and energy generation.15 The closest historical analogy
was the electrification of factories in the 1920s and the introduction of electric motors throughout manufacturing that

Fig. 6. Three-dimensional printed pancake motor structural support.

146 NEW SPACE 2017

Fig. 7. Photolithographically printed coils for the pancake motor.

led to rapid increases in productivity.16 Is there sufficient
innovation for success? To the economist Ronald Coase, innovation is built into a company to perform tasks that cannot
be accomplished by individuals through a market mechanism.
To the great economist Joseph Schumpeter, innovation may
be likened to the dance of Shiva creating waves of creative
destruction, with vibrant new technologies laying waste to
tired old industries. This is an evolutionary process of continuous innovation and culling. Self-replication technology
corresponds to one of the two Schumpeterian fundamental
technological innovations (new product and new means of
production). New means of production was highlighted as the
most important technological innovation—self-replication is

Fig. 8. Printed coil armature in 3D-printed pancake motor.

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

separated by periods of slow growth, with peaks corresponding to technological revolutions that then diffuse as infrastructure developments—1771 (industrial revolution of textile
production), 1829 (age of steam and railways), 1875 (age of
steel and heavy engineering), 1908 (age of oil, automobile,
electricity, and mass production), and 1971 (age of information and telecommunications). We postulate a sixth innovation cluster of post-information and communication
technologies (post-ICT) robotics and self-replicating machines
in the 2020s. Self-replication technology has the potential
to be a revolutionary technological paradigm change that is
associated with long-wave Kondratiev cycles. Such long-term
technologies create both wealth and more new jobs than they
destroy in expanding markets by creating new products and
services.
To the business theorist Clayton Christensen, innovation is
something altogether more ethereal—it cannot be ensnared,
surgically investigated, or controlled. Innovation is crushed
by bureaucratic attempts to harness it. Is novelty an indisFig. 9. EyasSat spacecraft model with central reaction wheel.
pensable component of innovation? Sir Isaac Newton, arguably the greatest scientist who has ever lived, whose output
of novel scientific ideas was prodigious, in a rare moment of
such (and simultaneously a new product also). To the phimodesty, wrote ‘‘if I have seen further, it is because I have
losopher of science Thomas Kuhn, there are two types of
stood on the shoulders of giants.’’ Here, we have the admission
scientific innovation—small, incremental innovations that
that any new, innovative ideas are never really truly new, but
progress scientific advance in small steps, and the rarer but
are derived in some fashion from one’s previous learning and
more devastating paradigm shifts that radically alter entire
experience—so-called ‘‘prior art.’’
scientific viewpoints. Self-replication technology is the latter.
These definitions of innovation are all true, of course,
There are three economic cycles—the well-known shortmaking the quest for understanding innovation ever more
term business cycle of 3–5 years, the long-wave Kondratiev
mysterious. But here, there are two aspects to innovations of
cycle of 40–60 years, and the medium-wave Kuznets cycle of
importance—the technically creative aspect and the entre15–25 years.17 The Kuznets cycle corresponds to the lifepreneurial aspect that brings the technical creation to the
cycle of replacement of capital equipment through major
market. Indeed, the entrepreneurial aspect may not even need
investments—self-replication technology will eliminate this
technical novelty as it may involve identifying new markets
cycle entirely by providing continuous upgrading at low cost.
by adapting an existing technology or product. Conversely,
The Kondratiev cycle comprises economic peaks that are
there are many technical creations that never make it to the
market, or do but fail to catch, or
do but are subsequently supplanted. Or, the technical novelty
may be just too innovative and
must wait for the market to catch
up. Evidently, technical creativity
is no guarantee of success—this is
the source of the ethereal quality
of innovation. Celebration of the
entrepreneurial aspect was emphasized by Peter Diamandis in
his best-selling book Abundance:
Fig. 10. Modified Yamashida-Nakaruma hardware analog neuron circuit used on a desktop rover.

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 147

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

The Future is Better Than You Think but the work presented here
is on technical innovation. Most innovations begin in a primitive state—our 3D-printed motors will not compete with traditional motors initially. They may appeal to early adopters in
niche markets but crossing the chasm to the majority market will
require superior qualities such as price, performance, or ease of
use. This penetration into the majority market often takes considerable time, for example, aeroplane (1903–1935+) and mobile
phone (1983–1995+).
An important facet of innovation is the requirement for
education, particularly university education.18 Universities
perform research and development as they form research
groups of skilled and educated people whom they have trained.
Their research is often funded by public and private investors.
Universities are the repository of human capital, which it
educates with human knowledge. This is the origin of the work
on self-replicating machines presented here—it is unlikely that
corporate industry could have spawned such a child.
We have adopted an open innovations approach in order
not to be shackled by patent designs (our designs are constantly evolving)—evidence suggests that it is more efficient
and productive than patenting. Patents can act as straitjackets
to accelerating innovation. Patent trolls do not engage in
innovative activity but serve to block it. They do business by
suing for patent infringement of their own typically vague,
generalized, and speculative patents. Between 40% and 90%
of patents are never exploited. It is questionable as to whether
patents offer any real protection. Inter partes review (IPR),
designed to combat patent trolls, can invalidate patents (with
an average 70% invalidation rate), but smallholders are particularly vulnerable when IPR is petitioned by powerful corporations.19 Open innovation provides the prospect for
attracting external contributions. Publishing developments
should prevent parasitism by patent trolls. This presents a
challenge to any business model. Could this project become a
unicorn? Unicorns are startups that have an evaluation exceeding $1B within a year or two of starting but have yet to be
floated on the stock market. Many have negligible revenues
that do not reflect these high valuations that are inflated by
the investors. When floated on the stock market, they often
cannot command such valuations. Investors are offered
guaranteed returns if valuations drop when floated on the
stock market. As a consequence, common stocks such as
those held by employees are diluted. Notwithstanding that
caveat, we have been unsuccessful in attracting investment.
Despite our stepping stones, we are too far away from the
market and must rely on government sources to bring us
closer to the market.

148 NEW SPACE 2017

ARE THERE LEGAL SHOWSTOPPERS?
The Outer Space Treaty (1967) (and the unratified and
therefore irrelevant Moon Treaty of 1979) forbids the appropriation of natural resources on the Moon or other celestial
bodies by any nation. Further, occupation by emplaced
structures does not imply property rights. This, of course, does
not refer to the structure itself that retains its ownership interests. Further, it does not pass comments on manufactured
products that are created from mined raw materials. Given the
failure of the Bogota Declaration (1976) to secure the geostationary orbit as subject to national appropriation by equatorial nation states, it is unlikely that freedom of use of
extraterrestrial resources will be successfully challenged. The
geostationary orbit is a scarce and finite resource of physical
space that is exploited by communications satellites and is
being degraded by such use when end-of-life geostationary
satellites are not inserted into a graveyard orbit. Currently,
this constitutes a customary (though undesirable) practice
that may be directly applicable to lunar exploitation of raw
materials that are similarly degraded by use. Nevertheless, in
reality, the law generally implements a form of ‘‘wait-andsee’’ policy to ensure that desirable commercial development
is not curtailed by premature legislation. The unratified Moon
Treaty (1979) exemplifies this.
Legal positivism holds that economic analysis may be applied to tort, contract, and criminal law to increase economic
efficiency in a Pareto sense.20,21 The goal is to minimize all
costs, including the costs of legal error and incurred financial
costs. In a criminal case, the probability of guilt and deterrent
to criminality must be balanced against the probability of
wrongful punishment (price) of the innocent based on the
social cost of criminal behavior. The legal positivist approach,
however, has been disputed by the Hayekian view that law as
order emerges spontaneously to mediate consistent interpersonal relations.22 This argument is weak—bordering on the
mystical—in comparison with the legal positivist argument
that imposes a utilitarian principle to the conduct of international law. There are, nevertheless, weaknesses in the market
mechanism (imperfect information, transaction costs, and externalities in particular) requiring additional mechanisms such
as welfare economics to compensate.23 These, of course, must
be considered in the economic approach to legal judgment. This
suggests that in situ resource utilization should be supported
legally if economic principles are observed.
There are further legal issues introduced by self-replication
technology. The most relevant legal precedent regarding selfreplicating entities concerns seeds.24,25 The case of Monsanto
versus Bowman concerned a dispute over patent exhaustion

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

on Monsanto’s Roundup-Ready soyabeans that were genetically engineered to be herbicide resistant. It was argued that
the patent on the bean did not extend to second-generation
beans that were grown from the purchased first generation.
The sale of the product was considered to have exhausted the
patent on the product, permitting it to be used or resold. With
self-replicating entities however, using and copying are the
same thing. The patent right was, thus, upheld as applicable to
subsequent generations of seeds. This implies that the owner
of the original self-replicating machine will retain rights on all
subsequent generations according to the precedent of Monsanto versus Bowman. This is a worrisome prospect.

CONCLUSIONS
It is estimated that a self-replicator prototype could be developed within 6 years with a cumulative budget of $12–15 M.
A flight version would take a further 2–3 years to enhance the
self-replicator reliability and its applicability to the Moon.
Hence, a self-replicator could be delivered to the lunar surface
within a decade. Assuming a 6-month replication time, it
would take just 6 years to populate the Moon with 2 million
self-replicating factories. Necessity is not the mother of invention as commonly espoused26—invention is directed to
create necessity. This productive capacity on the Moon enabled by self-replicating machines may be exploited by the
private sector in ways that are currently unimagined as the
space sector opens to private ingenuity.
It has been contended that social progress, being subject to
political whim, is random; whereas technological progress is
directional, dictated by its own scientific logic. A utopian
society may, thus, be defined as that which provides the political will to focus technological progress toward industrial
sustainability and safeguarding the natural environment.27
Perhaps this is so. According to this logic, space exploration
can contribute to this utopian vision. The primary argument
against the use of space resources for human utility is that the
market (humans) is physically separated by considerable
barriers from the resource locations on the Moon or asteroids.28 However, this is true for material resources but does
not apply to resources that can be delivered remotely—energy
is one such commodity. The application of self-replicating
machines on the Moon to the construction of swarms of Earthorbiting solar power satellites is given in Ref.29 This concept is
based on 3D printing of the energy transduction chain from
solar energy to the magnetron to generate beamed microwave
energy transmission to the Earth. The transmission of clean
energy from space to the Earth is both feasible and desirable.
In general, an economy that leads an innovation will
maintain an economic lead over an economy that copies and

adopts the innovation. The production function of an economy is defined by the relationship between the productive
output and the deployment of resource inputs. It defines
the efficiency of the economy in the allocation of resources.
There are two ways to foster economic growth—either increase
the amount of labor and capital in the economy or increase the
productivity of the economic actors. There are diminishing
returns to labor and capital investments. The Solow model
declared that sustained economic growth is dominated by per
capita increases in productive capacity due to technological
advancement.30 Such technological innovation accounted for
85% of economic growth in the United States in the period
1870–1950. Scientific and technological innovation has had a
primary role in enhancing economic productivity in Organisation for Economic Cooperation & Development (OECD)
countries driven by ICT.31 Similarly, the self-replicating machine offers the prospect for an internet of manufactures as a
development of the internet of things enabled by a networked
society. Such a vision would require robust user interfaces to
cross the chasm from early adopters to the majority market.
The future is pregnant with possibilities. But technological
innovation requires entrepreneurial innovation—for selfreplicating machines, the former is flourishing whereas the
latter is floundering. The entrepreneurial world appears not up
to the task in quite the way described by Peter Diamandis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the National Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada.

AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
No competing financial conflicts of interest exist.

REFERENCES
1. Ellery A, Welch C. A proposed public-private partnership for the funding of
robotic in-orbit servicers. Proceedings of Space 2002 and Robotics 2002,
Alburquerque, New Mexico, Paper No. 07291734ELLE 2002.
2. van Duk E, Zeelenberg M. Discounting of ambiguous information in economic
decision making. J Behav Decis Making. 2003;16:341–52.
3. Ellery A. John von Neumann’s self-replicating machine—Critical components
required. Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems, Budapest,
Hungary, Man & Cybernetics, 2016:314–19.
4. Ellery A. Are self-replicating machines feasible? AIAA J Spacecraft Rockets
2016;53(2):317–27.
5. Ellery A. How to build a self-replicating machine on the Moon. Proceedings of
ASCE Earth & Space Conference, Orlando, 2016.
6. Ellery A. Notes on extraterrestrial applications of 3D-printing with regard to
self-replicating machines. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Automation Science & Engineering (CASE), Gothernburg, 2015:930–35.
7. Ellery A. Ultimate smart system—Steps towards a self-replicating machine.
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Smart Materials & Structures,
Vancouver, Canada, 2015:225–34.

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 149

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

8. Ellery A. Extraterrestrial 3D printing and in-situ resource utilisation to sidestep
launch costs. Proceedings of 14th Reinventing Space Conference, London, UK, 2016.
9. Larson S, Ellery A. Trainable analogue neural network with application to lunar
in-situ resource utilisation. Proceedings of the International Astronautics
Federation Congress, Jerusalem, IAC-15-D3.3.6, 2015.
10. Frigo J, Tilden M. Analogue neural network control method proposed for use in
a backup satellite control mode. Proceedings of SPIE Mobile Robots XII 3210,
Pittsburgh, PA, 1998:84.
11. Ellery A. Progress towards 3D printed mechatronic systems. Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Technology with Symposium on 3D
Printing, Tapei, Taiwan, 2016:1129–133.
12. Wiesenfeld K, Moss F. Stochastic resonance and the benefits of noise: From ice
ages to crayfish and SQUIDS. Nature. 1995;373:33–36.
13. Ellery A. Artificial intelligence through symbolic connectionism—A biomimetic
rapprochement. In Biomimetic Technologies: Principles & Applications, Ngo D
(ed.). Cambridge, UK: Elsevier Publishing, 2015.
14. Schmidhuber J. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Netw.
2015;61:85–117.
15. Bresnahan T, Trajtenberg M. General purpose technologies: Engines of growth.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4148, 1992.
16. Rosenberg N. Innovation and economic growth. Proceedings of OECD
Conference on Innovation & Growth, Lugano, Switzerland, 2004.
17. Forrester J. Business structure, economic cycles and national policy. Futures.
1976;8:195–214.
18. Strandberg G. Technology, economics and politics. J Ind Technol. 2002;18(2):
2–4.
19. Eden S. The greatest American invention. Popular Mech. 2016;93–99.
20. Posner R. Economic approach to legal procedure and judicial administration.
J Legal Stud. 1973;2(2):399–458.
21. Posner R. Economic approach to law. Texas Law Rev 1975;53:757–82.
22. Zywicki T, Sanders A. Posner, Hayek and the economic analysis of law. Iowa Law
Rev. 2008;93(2):559–603.
23. Veljanovski C. Economic approach to law: A critical introduction. Br J Law Soc.
1980;7(2):158–93.
24. Sheff J. Self-replicating technologies. Stanf Technol Law Rev. 2013;16(2):229–56.
25. Loney Z. Bowman’s beanstalks: Patent exhaustion in self-replicating
technologies. Vanderbilt J Entertain Technol Law. 2013;15(4):949–82.
26. Fitzhugh B. Risk and invention in human technological evolution. J Anthropol
Archaeol. 2001;20:125–67.
27. Braun E. Can technological innovation lead us to utopia? Futures. 1994;26(8):
852–61.
28. Krugman P. Space: The final frontier. J Econ Perspect. 1998;12(2):161–74.
29. Ellery A. Solar power satellites for clean energy enabled through disruptive
technologies. Proceedings of 23rd World Energy Congress (Award Winning
Papers), Istanbul, Turkey, 2016:133–47.
30. Solow R. Technical change and the aggregate production function. Rev Econ
Stat. 1957;39:312–20.
31. OECD. Science, technology and innovation in the new economy. OECD Observer
Policy Brief (Sep) 2000:1–9.
32. Nelson T, Olson M, Wood H. Long delay telecontrol of lunar mining equipment.
Proceedings of the 6th ASCE Specialty Conference & Exposition on Engineering,
Construction, and Operations in Space (Space 1998), Albuquerque, NM, 1998:477–84.
33. Conway L, Volz R, Walker M. Teleautonomous systems: Projecting and
coordinating intelligent action at a distance. IEEE Trans Robot Autom. 1990;
6(2):146–58.
34. Ellery A. Selective snapshot of state-of-the-art artificial intelligence and robotics
with reference to the Icarus starship. J Br Interplanet Soc. 2010;62:427–39.
35. Parker C, Zhang H, Kube R. Blind bulldozing: Multiple robot nest construction.
Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots &
Systems, Las Vegas, NV, 2003:2010–2015.
36. Crabbe F, Dyer M. Second order networks for wall-building agents. Proceedings
of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Washington, DC,
1999:2178–183.

150 NEW SPACE 2017

37. Setterfield T, Ellery A, Frazier C. Mechanical design and testing of an
instrumented rocker-bogie mobility system for the Kapvik micro-rover. J Br
Interplanet Soc. 2014;67:96–104.
38. Hewitt R, Ellery A, de Ruiter A. LIDAR classification using neural networks for
planetary rover missions. Int J Adv Rob Syst. 2017. [In press].
39. Post M, Li J, Quine B. Planetary micro-rover operations on Mars using a Bayesian
framework for inference and control. Acta Astronaut. 2016;120:295–314.
40. Roberts J, Duff E, Corke P, Sikka P, Winstanley G, Cunningham J. Autonomous
control of underground mining vehicles using reactive navigation. Proceedings
of IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation, San Francisco,
CA, 2000:3790–795.
41. Buyurgan N, Meyyappan L, Saygin C, Dagli C. Real-time routing selection for
automated guided vehicles in a flexible manufacturing system. J Manuf Technol
Manage. 2005;18(2):169–81.
42. Lynch B, Ellery A, Nitzsche F. (2008) Two-dimensional robotic vehicle path
planning based on artificial potential fields. CSME Forum (CCToMM), Ottawa
University, Canada, 2008.
43. Cross M, Ellery A, Qadi A. Estimating terrain parameters for a rigid wheeled
rover using neural networks. J Terramech. 2013;50(3):165–74.
44. Sun D, Mills J. Adaptive synchronised control for coordination of multirobot
assembly tasks. IEEE Trans Robot Autom. 2002;18(3):498–10.
45. Lima P, Custudio L. Artificial intelligence and systems theory: Applied to
cooperative robots. Int J Adv Rob Syst. 2004;1(3):141–48.
46. Singh S, Simmons R. Task planning for robotic excavation. Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots & Systems, Raleigh, NC, 1992.
47. Singh S. Learning to predict resistive force during robotic excavation.
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation,
Nagoya, Japan, 1995:2102–107.
48. Shi X, Lever P, Wang F-Y. Experimental robotic excavation with fuzzy logic and
neural networks. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics &
Automation, Minneapolis, MN, 1996:957–62.
49. Basnet C, Mize J. Scheduling and control of flexible manufacturing systems: A
critical review. Int J Comput Integr Manuf. 1994;7:740–55.
50. Zaytoon J. Specification and design of logic controllers for automated
manufacturing systems. Robot Comput Integr Manuf. 1996;12(4):353–66.
51. Kaid H, El-Tamimi A, Nasr E, Al-Ahmari A. Applications of Petri net based models
in manufacturing systems: A review. Proceedings of the International Conference
on Operations Excellence & Service Engineering, Orlando, FL, 2015:516–28.
52. Sava A, Alla H. Combining hybrid Petri nets and hybrid automata. IEEE Trans
Robot Autom. 2001;17(5):670–78.
53. Sukthomya W, Tannock J. Training of neural nets to model manufacturing
processes. J Intell Manuf. 2005;16:39–51.
54. Monostori L, Viharos Z, Markos S. Satisfying various requirements in different
levels and stages of machining using one general ANN-based process model.
J Mat Process Technol. 2000;107:228–35.
55. Arzi Y, Iaroslavitz L. Neural network-based adaptive production control system for a
flexible manufactutring cell under a random environment. IIE Trans. 1999;31:217–30.
56. Hamada K, Baba T, Sato K, Yufu M. Hybridising a genetic algorithm with rulebased reasoning for production planning. IEEE Expert. 1995;10:60–67.
57. Mirhosseyni H, Webb P. Hybrid fuzzy knowledge-based expert system and
genetic algorithm for efficient selection and assignment of material handling
equipment. Exp Syst Appl. 2009;36:11875–1887.
58. Sach R. Neural network for solving job-shop scheduling problem. IOSR J
Comput Eng. 2014;16(6):18–25.
59. Eguchi T, Oha F, Hirai T. Neural network approach to dynamic job shop
scheduling. In Global Production Management, Martins K, et al. (ed.). Boston:
Springer Publishers, 1999:152–59.
60. Rabelo L, Alpetkin S. Adaptive scheduling and control using artificial neural
networks and expert systems for a hierarchical/distributed FMS architecture.
Proceedings of Rensselaer’s 2nd International Conference on Computer
Integrated Manufacturing, Troy, NY, 1990:538–45.
61. Weekman G, Ganduri C, Konance D. Neural network job shop scheduler. J Intell
Manuf. 2008;19:191–201.

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

62. Kechadi M, Low K, Goncaves G. Recurrent neural network approach for cyclic
job shop scheduling problem. J Manuf Syst. 2013;32:689–99.
63. Bashir M, Islam Z, Masud A. Approach to job-shop scheduling problem using rule
extraction neural network model. Global J Comput Sci Technol. 2011;11(7):15–20.
64. Zhou D, Cherkassky V, Baldwin T, Olson D. Neural network approach to job-shop
scheduling. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 1991;2(1):175–79.
65. Meyyappan L, Saygin C, Dagli C. Real-time routing in flexible flow shops: A selfadaptive swarm-based control model. Int J Prod Res. 2007;45(21):5157–172.
66. Ueda K, Hatono I, Fujii N, Vaario J. Reinforcement learning approaches to
biological manufacturing systems. CIRP Ann Manuf Technol. 2000;49(1):343–46.
67. Kunica Z, Vranjes B. Towards automatic generation of plans for automated
assembly. Int J Prod Res. 1999;37(8):1817–836.
68. Homem de Mello L, Sanderson A. AND/OR graph representation of assembly
plans. IEEE Trans Robot Autom. 1990;6(2):188–99.
69. Homem de Mello L, Sanderson A. Correct and complete algorithm for the generation
of mechanical assembly sequences. IEEE Trans Robot Autom. 1991;7(2):228–40.
70. Marian R, Luong L, Abhary K. Assembly sequence planning and optimisation
using genetic algorithms: Part 1. Automatic generation of feasible assembly
sequences. Appl Soft Comput. 2003;2/3F:223–53.
71. Malcolm C, Smithers T. Symbol grounding via a hybrid architecture in an
autonomous assembly system. Robot Autonom Syst. 1990;6:123–44.
72. Hong D, Cho H. Neural network-based computational scheme for generating
optimised robotic assembly sequences. Eng Appl Artif Intell. 1995;8(2):129–45.
73. Sinanoglu C, Borklu R. Assembly sequence planning system for mechanical
parts using neural networks. Assemb Autom. 2005;25(1):38–52.
74. Senin N, Groppetti R, Wallace D. Concurrent assembly planning with genetic
algorithms. Robot Comput Integr Manuf. 2000;16:65–72.

75. Asada H, By A. Kinematic analysis of workpart fixturing for flexible assembly
with automatically reconfigurable fixtures. IEEE J Robot Autom. 1985;1(2):
86–94.
76. Nee A, Bhattacharyya N, Poo A. Applying AI in jigs and fixtures design. Robot
Comput Integr Manuf. 1987;3(2):195–200.
77. Kumar S, Nee A, Prombanpong S. Expert fixture-design system for an
automated manufacturing environment. Comput Aided Des. 1992;24(6):
316–26.
78. Perremans P. Feature-based description of modular fixturing elements: The key
to an expert system for the automatic design of the physical feature. Adv Eng
Softw. 1996;25:19–27.
79. Lin Z-C, Huang J-C. Application of neural networks in fixture planning by
pattern classification. J Intell Manuf. 1997;8:307–22.

APPENDIX: ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE REQUIREMENTS
FOR SELF-REPLICATING MACHINES

of such desynchronization is to implement greater autonomy
at the remote robot. This allows supervisory control where the
remote robot operates autonomously and invokes human
operator interaction only during exceptional states. Ultimately, the goal is to implement full autonomy without the
requirement for human intervention even under fault conditions.
We first consider approaches to spacecraft autonomy.
Current spacecraft operations are based on uploaded scripts
with time-tagged sequences of commands. If off-nominal
conditions occur, the spacecraft is entered into safe mode until
the problem is resolved by human interaction from the
ground. Spacecraft autonomy involves imparting the spacecraft with the capacity to generate its own plans and to re-plan
if necessary based on theorem-proving methods. The plan
constitutes a set of actions that will transform the current state
of the world into a goal state. This involves applying logical
operators that have conditions defining their applicability and
actions that dictate their effects: IF (c1.cn) THEN ai. Conditions can invoke multiple actions that must be prioritized with
respect to constraints on available resources such as time,
energy, or conflicts. This is the deliberative component.

Remote teleoperation of ISS-board microgravity experiments (telescience) from the Earth are simple with few external perturbation events and with tolerable time constraints.
Lunar activities monitored from the Earth, however, will involve time delays as well as more complex operations. Teleoperation on the Moon involves signal propagation and
network time delays imposing inefficient move-and-wait
protocols in performing tasks remotely. Such time delays introduce instabilities, particularly in interaction forces between
tools and the environment. To compensate for this time delay,
the local simulation at the ground operator must predict delayed events at the remote robot. This is typically achieved
through predictive displays to simulate the remote robot and
its environment. There a number of mechanisms for implementing predictive dynamics—Smith predictor, neural
network controller, fuzzy logic, or a combination of these.32
An alternative approach is to employ time and position clutches that allow control between the local simulation and the
remote robot to be desynchronized.33 The ultimate expression

Address correspondence to:
A. Alex Ellery
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive
Ontario
Ottawa K1S 5B6
Canada
E-mail: aellery@mae.carleton.ca

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 151

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

Execution of those plans is monitored to detect plan failure—
this is where the reactivity component is implemented. Plan
failure invokes fault detection, isolation, and recovery techniques. It typically results in adding further subgoals to the
original plan to solve the current problem before pursuing the
original goals. Some advanced artificial intelligence techniques applied to advanced spacecraft are reviewed in Ref.34
Robotic operations on the Moon will involve the control of
rover vehicles and attached robotic devices. Reactive control
methods can accomplish sophisticated capabilities. Blind
bulldozing by swarms of robotic excavator vehicles can be
exploited for worksite preparation such as leveling and/or
paving operations.35 Blind bulldozing may be based on simple
ant-like behaviors that plough material outward until a force
threshold is measured. Stigmergy controls the construction
process in that ploughed material creates walls of increasing
strength determined by the distance along which the accumulating material has been pushed. Hence, current/final nest
size is determined by:
F +

rn = T

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
FT2 + (Fi qbr0 )2
,
Fi qb

(3)

where FT = threshold force, Fi = current push force, q = soil
density, b = tool width, and r0 = initial nest radius. Braitenbergstyle neurocontrollers can generate action sequences to build
walls, corridors, intersections, and briar patches.36 For more
sophisticated goal-directed rover capabilities, mapbuilding is
necessary. Self-location and mapping are well established in
mobile robotics. The Kapvik micro-rover is a representative
general-purpose end-to-end prototype that is designed for the
Moon and Mars37 and that employs a Kalman filter-based autonomous navigation system.38 Bayesian methods have also
been applied to planetary micro-rover applications to represent
the properties of the cells of an occupancy grid for map-based
navigation.39 Similarly, load-haul-dump mining vehicles require terrain maps to navigate effectively within tunnels.40
They are similar to indoor environments by being highly
constrained where no GPS signal is available. Similar to underground mining, automated guided vehicles are commonly
adopted in flexible manufacturing systems (FMS) to transport
material within the factory.41 They also require planning so that
scheduling is in real time and routing occurs without collision
with other vehicles to ensure the timely delivery of material at
the appropriate locations. They must maximize throughput
while minimizing waiting times. Within such constrained environments, potential field techniques are well suited.42 Online
measurement of soil properties may aid tractive performance
of such vehicles, especially slippage.43 For the coordination of
multiple robots, robot motion must be synchronized in coop-

152 NEW SPACE 2017

erative tasks such as in the maintenance of fixed kinematic
relations between robots (e.g., two robots grasping a common
payload).44 More loosely, soccer robotics is a culmination of the
problem of multi-robot cooperation toward a specific goal
while coping with static and dynamic constraints. One possible
approach (among many) is to treat each robot as a knowledgebased agent that cooperates through a distributed blackboard
(shared virtual global memory).45 Multiple knowledge-based
expert systems operate in their own specialized domains but
communicate with each other through the blackboard to cooperate to solve global problems beyond individual capacities.
Excavation is a control process that involves sensors to
detect the current configuration of the local terrain compared
with a goal configuration of the terrain, and it uses the difference to generate a stepped sequence of robotic actions to
progressively reduce that difference to zero subject to constraints such as minimum energy costs. Manipulator actions
are digging trajectories—a dig may be characterized parametrically by three parameters that determine the excavated
volume (action space): approach angle of the blade from
horizontal a, height of blade entry into the terrain above
datum h, and dig distance from entry into the terrain d.46
Candidate action spaces (similar to configuration spaces in
manipulators) are defined as feasible but suboptimal, feasible
and optimal, and infeasible (similar to cells in grid-based
mapbuilding in mobile robots). Once an action space has been
selected, a bucket trajectory may be defined in joint space by
using standard inverse kinematics. The force required to excavate is given by:
F = V q + As,

(4)

where s = c + r tan u = soil shear strength, c = soil cohesion,
j = soil friction angle, s = normal soil stress, A = blade-soil
interaction area, q = soil density, and V = excavated soil volume. The resistive forces on a flat excavation blade as the
robot scoops and overcomes shear stresses in soil may be
modeled by the fundamental equation of earthmoving. The
equation requires physical parameter inputs that may be a
priori unknown and certain assumptions such as flat blade
may be inaccurate, rendering reliable predictions extremely
difficult. Soil has elastic, plastic, and damping properties—soil
stiffness is nonlinear in that it is subject to saturation followed
by dynamic shearing failure that is repeatedly applied (like
earthquake dynamics). Soil properties and their responses to
applied shearing forces are difficult to predict—for instance,
prior applied shearing and normal forces will alter soil compaction. These models are simplistic, but stochastic methods
such as Kalman filter estimation can be employed to enhance
robustness. A number of methods may be used to learn to

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

SPACE EXPLORATION AND SELF-REPLICATION TECHNOLOGY

predict resistive forces, but all are improved by using a mechanical model as their basis.47 Fuzzy if-then rules may implement sequences of excavation tasks that are derived from
human operator experience.48 Neural networks may be employed to learn these fuzzy rules based on force/torque and
other sensory inputs with weight outputs.
Once the desired materials have been extracted, manufacturing is the next stage. Flexible manufacturing permits variations in
time regarding the manufacture of multiple parts. There are
several generic problems associated with flexible manufacturing:
(i) part selection, (ii) machine grouping, (iii) part ratio production,
(iv) resource allocation, and (v) line loading.49 Scheduling problems form a common theme in many of these tasks from job-shop
scheduling to assembly-line balancing. Petri nets constitute a
graphical method to represent events and their relations that can
graphically model, analyze, and synchronize the execution of
complex parallel and serial manufacturing procedures. They
comprise directed arcs that are a link between two different types
of nodes—place and transitions. Petri nets can be integrated into
complementary techniques such as the structured analysis and
design technique.50 There are many different varieties of Petri
nets, including colored timed object-oriented Petri nets that are
suitable for representing the dynamics, time duration, and
scheduling aspects of flexible manufacturing, including automated guided vehicle routing.51 In particular, deadlock detection
and recovery through resource re-allocation is essential. Hybrid
Petri net-automata promise a unified approach to modeling
and analyzing workshop flow.52 Neural networks may be used to
model complex manufacturing processes.53 Neural nets have
been used as process models for manufacturing, particularly
because the input-output training compensates for any ill-posed
underlying mechanisms.54 A neural network-based production
system offers superior performance to decision trees (ID3) for
material scheduling and routing in a flexible manufacturing cell
of several machine tools.55 Job-shop scheduling must allocate
jobs to machines: A number of jobs n comprising a number of
subjobs k (sequence constraint) are allocated to m machines
(resource constraint). The scheduler must specify a start time for
subjobs to achieve a desired result based on the processing time
for each subjob. The expert system with if-then production rules
(fuzzy or crisp) in conjunction with the genetic algorithm search
for the shortest time solutions is suited to job-shop scheduling.56,57 Neural networks have been applied to stringent real-time
job scheduling and planning problems. Job scheduling to minimize job completion time for n jobs subject to resource constraints such as m machines is an non-deterministic polynomialtime (NP)-hard schedule optimization problem. The Hopfield net
is an example of a neural network that is suited to the job-shop
scheduling problem.58 It involves determining the sequences of

jobs according to the resources available and performance criteria. Mathematically, performance may be defined as59:
n

C = + wi · max (0, Dt - tf )=n,

(5)

i=1

where wi = delay penalty/time (weighting), Dt = completion
time, tf = delivery date, and n = number of jobs. The solution is
given by the minimum quadratic energy configuration of the
Hopfield net of mn(mn +1)/2 neurons corresponding to minimizing the job start times. Neural networks can select rules for
scheduling jobs and machines for FMS according to input
patterns, whereas expert systems can interpret constraints imposed such as timing.60 Any work piece undergoes a number of
operations where the output of one operation feeds into the
input of another. Machine selection is dependent on the input
parameters such as workpiece material and geometry, jigging,
and machining cutting (force, power, and roughness of finish).
A neural net scheduler has been used to schedule job shops by
optimizing start times.61 A genetic algorithm was used to
generate optimal schedules of job sequences. Recurrent neural
networks have also been used to minimize the cycle time of jobshop schedules.62 The constraints include the number of machines, number of jobs, set of operations, and precedence
constraints. The recurrent neural network was input with start
time and schedules and used an energy function to perform a
steepest descent of the form s(t + 1) = s(t) - gqe(s)
where
qs
s(t) = schedule time, E(s) = energy function. This work indicates
that neural networks can be applied to scheduling and planning
problems. A production rule-based scheduler may be extracted
from a neural net.63 An analogue network has been developed
for job-shop scheduling64 in which the number of neurons is
mk with mk+mk(k-k/n) interconnection weights that grow
linearly with the number of jobs. Decentralized swarm-based
routing in job-shop allocation (specifically a wasp colony) is
both adaptive and robust, despite being based on simple
rules.65 The potential field approach allows control of the
movement of material by specific attraction to machines.66
Hence, there are a multitude of techniques for job-shop
scheduling with different advantages, but hybrid techniques
built around neural networks offer multiple advantages.
Once parts have been manufactured, individual parts must
be assembled through a sequence of operations into a final
product with well-defined geometric relations between the
parts. Assembly plans are ordered sequences of operations
that transform one configuration of parts into another. The
parts are defined by their relative positions, which are bound
in an assembly. A relational model of assembly may be defined as (P, C, A, R, a) where P = part, C = contact surface between pairs of parts, A = attachment between pairs of parts,

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.  VOL. 5

NO. 3  2017

NEW SPACE 153

Downloaded by 99.249.46.74 from online.liebertpub.com at 09/16/17. For personal use only.

ELLERY

R = (P U C U A) = relationship between pairs of parts, and
a = (P [ C [ A [ R) = attribute function. An assembly is a
complex process involving identifying the matings of the
parts to be assembled, defining a sequence of gravity-based
assembly part ordering, identifying grips on each part and the
part orientation, the stability of parts and their relationships,
and the final product position. The starting point of the parts
and the assembly is a set of CAD/CAM files.67 AND/OR graphs
are commonly used to represent and search for feasible
assembly plans exhaustively by using the AO* search algorithm.68,69 The nodes represent subassemblies or parts,
whereas the arcs between nodes define the relative difficulty
of the operation between configurations. Backward search
implies that disassembling the desired final assembly can be
inverted into an assembly sequence. Assembly sequence plans
may also be searched for by using genetic algorithms for large
AND/OR graphs.70 The SOMASS assembly system was a
backtracking Prolog-based hierarchical assembly planner
with a reactive behavior-based plan execution system.71
Neural networks can generate assembly sequences that are
subject to constraints such as cost defined by an expert system.72 Neural networks have been applied to optimal assembly
sequence planning.73 Input to the neural net was an assembly
connection graph (such as AND/OR graph or Petri net) representing parts and their relations, whereas its output was an
optimal assembly sequence. The neural network was trained
on sets of assembly sequences using back propagation
learning. As the number of parts increases, there is an exponential increase in the number of combinations—like job shop
scheduling, it is an NP-hard problem. Genetic algorithms have
been applied to concurrent assembly planning to stochastically search for globally optimal solutions.74 Assembly plans
comprising AND/OR graphs were encoded into genomes and

154 NEW SPACE 2017

subjected to fitness scores based on plan execution time. A
related issue is the automated design of jigs and fixtures,
particularly for milling and assembly operations. Although
the remote center compliance end effector mechanism can
perform insertion operations with positioning errors, jigs and
fixtures are still necessary for assembly. Fixtures include
clamping, positioning/guiding, and supporting jigs that set
the position/orientation of the workpiece to the tool. The
fixture design is based on workpiece geometry and size, its
surfaces and tolerances, and tooling geometry and performance. This requires data on the geometry and topographic
relations of workpieces—fixtures may support from beneath
(e.g., mounting plate), top (e.g., hold-down clamp), or side
(e.g., side clamp). An adaptive, reconfigurable fixturing system for a wide range of workpieces has been demonstrated.75
A group of fixture elements can be relocated in different
combinations to immobilize any workpiece geometry. The
four fixture elements were vertical clamps, horizontal clamps,
horizontal guides, and vertical supports for immobilizing
exterior cases. This kind of information can be stored in an
expert system as if-then rules and/or frames.76–78 Critical for
this capability is the integration of the pattern recognition
capability of neural networks with workpiece and fixture
knowledge.79 The basic artificial intelligence requirements for
mining, processing, manufacturing, and assembly of physical
products and parts are understood and there exist piecemeal
solutions that may be assembled into a coherent framework
that is required for a self-replicating machine. The general
conclusion is that neural networks (including deep learning
systems) can implement much, and potentially all, of the
artificial intelligence required for a lunar self-replicating
machine. Of course, the devil will be in the detail but there is
no fundamental showstopper.

MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC.

