Review Article

Generating and storing power on the moon
using in situ resources
Alex Ellery 

Proc IMechE Part G:
J Aerospace Engineering
2021, Vol. 0(0) 1–19
© IMechE 2021

Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/09544100211029433
journals.sagepub.com/home/pig

Abstract
The Moon Village and similar concepts are strongly reliant on in situ resource utilisation (ISRU). There is great interest in
harvesting solar power using locally leveraged in situ resources as an essential facet of in situ infrastructure. Traditionally,
silicon-based photovoltaic cells have been assumed, preferably manufactured in situ using a 3D printing rover, but there are
major difﬁculties with such scenarios. Solar cells require pre-processing of regolith and solar cell manufacture. We present
an alternative lunar resource leveraged-solar power production system on the Moon which can yield high conversion
efﬁciencies – solar Fresnel lens-thermionic conversion. The thermionic vacuum tube is constructed from lunar-derived
materials and NiFe asteroidal ores on the Moon. Given that the majority of energy required for ISRU is thermal, thermionic
conversion exploits this energy source directly. Silicates such as anorthite can be treated with acid to yield alumina and
silicic acid in solution from which pure silica can be precipitated. Pure silica when heated to high temperature yields fused
silica glass which is transparent – fused silica glass may be employed to manufacture Fresnel lenses and/or mirrors. Both
silica and alumina may be input to the Metalysis Fray Farthing Chen Cambridge electrolytic process to yield near pure Si and
near pure Al, respectively.
Keywords
In situ resource utilisation, lunar base, lunar power, solar concentrator, thermionic conversion, ﬂywheels
Date received: 10 November 2020; accepted: 30 May 2021

Introduction
To maximise sustainability in our imminent ventures to the
Moon, it will become essential to maximise our utilisation
of local resources on the Moon while minimising the
resources required to be supplied from Earth. In terms of
lunar infrastructure development, it will be essential to
build suitable energy generation and energy storage facilities on the Moon for the Moon from the Moon. Launch
from the lunar surface to geostationary equatorial orbit
(GEO) about Earth requires a delta-v of 3.3 km/s placing
a premium on sourcing propellant/oxidiser from lunar
resources to return cargo and humans to Earth to reduce
the costs for human missions.
Most in situ resource utilisation (ISRU) scenarios
envisage extracting volatiles – water primarily – for life
support consumables, fuel cells and propellant/oxidiser.
Water can be electrolysed into hydrogen propellant and
oxygen. Ferrimagnetic magnetite (Fe3O4) with its Fe2+ in
nanoparticle form is a potentially useful material derivable
from lunar ilmenite – solar energy and the Fe3O4/FeO
redox pair offer the prospect of splitting water for the
production of hydrogen efﬁciently1 but most scenarios
envisage electrolytic splitting into hydrogen and oxygen.
To be sure, propellant and oxidiser constitutes the lion’s

share of mass required to indulge in space exploration.
There is little doubt that production of in situ consumables
will have the greatest impact on human mission costs.
Furthermore, consumables require minimal processing
following extraction but this advantage is offset by the
complexities involved in mining at the lunar poles. It has
been suggested that water ice may be mined from permanently shadowed craters (where the temperatures are
∼40 K) at the lunar poles. The infrastructure required to
implement this will be immense. It has been proposed that
giant mirrors mounted at peaks of eternal light can beam
sunlight into the dark craters to heat the water ice into
vapour which is recovered under a transparent ﬁlm onto
which it condenses and is recovered, that is, a solar still.2
The beamed solar energy may also be exploited by in situ
photovoltaic arrays to electrically split the water into
hydrogen/oxygen. The evolved gases must then be
Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering Department, Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON, Canada
Corresponding author:
Alex Ellery, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering Department, Carleton
University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.
Email: aellery@mae.carleton.ca

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)

2
compressed and stored cryogenically in LH2/LOX tankage of lunar launchers.
Self-sufﬁciency has been the primary motivation to
reduce reliance on the supply of consumables from Earth.
However, there is a trade that must be performed in determining the relative mix between solar energy and water
as fuel source on the Moon – clearly, solar energy is an
abundant renewable resource while water (for hydrogen/
oxygen) as a limited resource is not. This favours the adoption of direct solar energy consumption over fuel/oxidant
consumption, for example, electromagnetic launchers3 that
can substitute for cryogenic hydrogen/oxygen-fuelled
launchers from the lunar surface. We suggest that mining
the Moon for water to be burned as propellant/oxidiser is
wasteful of scarce resources and is unsustainable.4 Furthermore, the creation of a lunar infrastructure robotically –
without astronauts initially – with a wider exploitation of
lunar resources could encourage commercial exploitation
by reducing the barriers to business. Large-scale space
manufacturing is a highly desirable goal for supporting both
space exploration and terrestrial markets, for example, in
the provision of solar energy through solar power satellites
(SPS).5 Indeed, the lunar surface may be used as a
mounting platform for a solar power system from where it
could beam power to Earth from the Moon across the
384,000 km distance.6,7 Six lunar power stations (LPS)
located on the nearside residing along the eastern and
western limbs of the Moon can collect 130 TW of solar
energy for the delivery of 20 TW of electrical energy on
Earth (assuming a total end-to-end efﬁciency of 15%). They
provide the total equivalent of a 174 km diameter solar
array area (95,900 km2 area). Solar ridges may be angled to
the sun according to lunar latitude. Conversion to microwave is accomplished through magnetrons which is a microwave ampliﬁer vacuum tube. A minimum of three Earth
rectenna stations at 120o apart are required due to Earth’s
spin to ensure continuous power generation. To provide
continuous full power load, auxiliary reﬂectors are required
in orbit around the Moon (20 TW). Fleets of microwave
reﬂectors in high inclination eccentric low Earth orbits can
direct the microwave transmissions from the Moon to the
Earth’s rectennas on its nightside. The lunar power station
eliminates issues with structural stability of large structures
implied by large SPS. The 2-week lunar night is the most
signiﬁcant complication. Approaches to obviate this include the use of solar reﬂectors (lunettas) in lunar orbit to
project solar energy to the lunar surface. A lunar system
could deliver 20 TW electricity to 100,000 km2 of microwave rectenna receivers which could be implemented
over deserts or offshore. A more efﬁcient approach would
be to manufacture SPS on the Moon which are launched
into GEO orbit from the lunar surface.5,8 The employment
of swarms of small SPS eliminates the problem of structural
stability of large Earth orbiting structures and eliminates the
requirement of lunar orbiting solar relay satellites and Earth
orbiting microwave relays required from LPS.
Lunar resources include both minerals and volatiles
both embedded in lunar regolith (Table 1).

Table 1. Lunar resources (adapted from Reference 9).
Element

Source

Concentration
(average-measured max)

H
3
He
4
He
C
N
Fe
Ni
Co
W
Cr
Ti
Al
K
P

Regolith volatile
Regolith volatile
Regolith volatile
Regolith volatile
Regolith volatile
Mare basalt
Regolith
Regolith
Regolith
Mare basalt
Mare basalt
Highland anorthosite
KREEP
KREEP

50–150 μg/g
4–30 ng/g
14–100 μg/g
124–300 μg/g
81–150 μg/g
150–170 mg/g
250–330 μg/g
35–68 μg/g
0.37–1.95 μg/g
2–10 mg/g
70–80 mg/g
180 mg/g
8–18 mg/g
6–22 mg/g

In terms of lunar mineral resources (ignoring volatiles),
the most abundant metals are silicon, iron, aluminium,
calcium, magnesium and titanium, the rest being in much
lower quantities, and we regard only the former as accessible. The main mare minerals are given in Table 2 as
single metal oxides, but it is important to note that they do
not exist in this state but as mixed metal oxides and
silicates.
We require only a handful of basic materials sourced
from the Moon to plausibly construct a locally sourced
energy generation and storage infrastructure to support the
Moon Village. Just 10 materials enables the manufacture
of almost any infrastructure facility including structural
functions, mechanical functions, electrical/electronic
functions, optical functions, thermal functions and actuation capabilities (Table 3). Hence, the Moon possesses
the resources required to generate and store solar power.
This requires a ‘satisﬁcing’ engineering philosophy
driven by local material accessibility rather than the
more traditional optimal engineering philosophy characteristic of Earth. On the Moon, we must literally build
everything from the ground up. To that end, we have
devised a lunar industrial ecology that extracts these
metals and oxides from lunar minerals as our material
resource base supplemented with more exotic materials
from asteroidal resources on the Moon (see Supplementary
Appendix). Our lunar in situ manufacturing ecology minimises waste – this also minimises superﬂuous energy
consumption.
As we venture towards revisiting the Moon to create the
‘Moon Village’, the supply of low-cost energy will be
a major aspect of infrastructure support for such a village.
A critical requirement for supporting a human base on the
Moon or Mars will be a sustainable and reliable source of
power. A lunar base requires ∼100 kW of power rising as
to as much as ∼MW to support a full mining and
manufacturing facility. To keep both capital and operational costs as low as possible, this energy must be

Ellery

3

Table 2. Abundance of lunar mare minerals resources.
Mare mineral
SiO2
Al2O3
TiO2
MgO
CaO
FeO
Na2O
K2O
P2O5
Cr2O3
MnO

Table 3. Lunar-derived functional materials required to
construct the subsystems of a spacecraft.

Average percentage (%)
44.35
13.8
5.4
9.0
11.35
15.6
0.45
0.25
0.2
0.35
0.2

Functionality

Lunar-derived material

Tensile structure

Wrought iron
Aluminium
Cast iron
Aluminium
Regolith/Sorel cement
Steel springs/ﬂexures
Silicone elastomers
Alumina
Fernico (e.g. Kovar)
Nickel
Fused silica glass
SiO2 ceramic
Tungsten
Alumina
Aluminium
Nickel
Fernico (e.g. Kovar)
Fused silica glass
SiO2/Al2O3/TiO2 ceramics
Silicone plastics
Silicon steel
Kovar
Nickel
Tungsten
Fused silica glass
Quicklime
Cobalt-ferrite
AlNiCo
Silicon steel
Permalloy
Aluminium
Quartz
Selenium
Aluminium
Nickel
Fused silica glass
Silicone oils
Water
Silicone elastomer/gel/cement
Hydrogen/oxygen

Compressive structure

Elastic structure
Hard structure
Thermal conduction
Thermal insulation
High thermal tolerance

supplied locally on the Moon supported by transduction
methods that can also be leveraged locally on the Moon.
To that end, we address the most appropriate modes of
energy generation, conversion and storage that can be
leveraged from lunar resources. Although solar photovoltaics in conjunction with chemical batteries/fuel cells
are de facto standard spacecraft technologies for energy
generation, they would be challenging to manufacture in
situ and are not optimal solutions for lunar base deployment which suffers two-week long eclipses. Although
solar photovoltaic energy farms have been proposed, the
manufacture of solar cell quality pn junctions using lunar
material is problematic. The commonest energy sources
proposed for supporting a lunar base are nuclear reactor
with Stirling cycle power conversion and solar photovoltaic array in conjunction with energy storage for the
lunar night. Energy storage options include batteries, fuel
cells or ﬂywheels. The requirement for energy storage can
be reduced by siting solar energy generators at peaks of
eternal light (such as the Malapert mountains near the
south pole). Solar energy can be exploited in other ways –
as thermal sources via solar concentrators such as mirrors
and/or Fresnel lenses.
We review the most appropriate lunar energy sources
and propose a new approach to energy generation and
storage that is suitable for leveraging from lunar in situ
resources. We propose that direct solar-thermal heating
of the regolith using mirrors or lenses to focus solar
energy into a reaction chamber is far more efﬁcient than
using photovoltaic cells which convert solar energy into
electrical energy which is then used to generate resistive
or other heating (such as laser) with the associated energy
conversion losses. However, electrical power is a convenient medium that can be transported between the site
of generation and the site of deployment. We have selected solar concentrators with thermionic conversion for
solar-electric energy generation and ﬂywheel energy
storage as the solutions suited to the Moon as well as
constructible from lunar resources. We envisage that
ﬂexible power generation and storage open up signiﬁcant
opportunities. The manufacture of solar power stations
with 500 GW capacity would require the automated

Electrical conduction

Electrical insulation

Active electronic devices
(vacuum tubes)

Magnetic material

Magnetic shield
Sensory transduction

Optical structure

Lubricant
Adhesive
Fuel

manufacture of ∼106 tonnes of solar cells or their
equivalent on the Moon.

Why solar photovoltaics are unsuitable
Fabrication of solar photovoltaics cells directly on the
lunar surface has been proposed in the past. It is reckoned
that over 90% of solar cell materials are extractable on the
Moon – Si, Fe, TiO2, Ca and Al.10 A solar cell is constructed from layers – glass substrate – Al electrode – Aldoped Si base – P-doped Si emitter – TiO2 anti-reﬂector –
Al electrode. An ultra-high vacuum ∼1010 Torr permits
the use of vacuum deposition to manufacture thin ﬁlm

4
solar cells. The vacuum environment is exploited by
electron beam evaporation of a target material. The vapour
affords the ability to create thin layers of silicon, aluminium, etc. Such vacuum vapour deposition can create
uniform layers with excellent mechanical properties. This
provides the basis for constructing solar cells from silicon
and other materials through both epitaxial growth in the
vapour phase (thermally generated at temperatures above
1500°C) and zone reﬁning. The Space Shuttle Wake
Shield Facility deployed behind the Space Shuttle in 1994/
5 exploited the ultravacuum of the orbital wake to demonstrate epitaxial growth of thin ﬁlms of GaAs and AlGaAs of high purity.11 However, such high efﬁciency IIIV tandem cells are not suited to lunar production. Single
crystal thin ﬁlm Si solar cells can potentially offer close to
25% efﬁciencies but require sophisticated, tightly controlled and extreme deposition techniques including high
quality thin wafers, chemical vapour deposition (CVD),
plasma deposition and antireﬂective surface coatings.12
The manufacture of such materials from extraterrestrial
sources will be extremely challenging. The efﬁciencies of
in situ manufactured solar cells are expected to be low ∼5–
10% due to a lack of precise controllability.
Moon-manufactured solar cells comprise a lunar glass
substrate, a doped silicon pn junction layer sandwiched
between aluminium electrodes and a TiO2 antireﬂective
coating. It is envisaged that these solar cells would be laid
like a carpet onto the lunar surface by rover at a rate of
∼1 m/h. Prior to the formation of the substrate, the terrain
may be pre-prepared and levelled by a blade mounted onto
the rover.13 The rover can then employ an array of parabolic reﬂectors or Fresnel lenses focussing light onto
a ﬁbre optic bundle to impart 60 W/cm2 to melt the lunar
regolith. On the Moon, 1370 W/m2 of solar energy is
available compared with the 950 W/m2 on the Earth’s
surface due to the Earth’s atmosphere. Melting regolith at
1800°C into an insulating glass substrate followed by
deposition of prefabricated solar cells has been subject to
preliminary experiments with lunar regolith simulant JSC1.14 Simulant was resistively heated in tungsten crucibles
in a vacuum chamber. The simulant softens at 1300°C and
melts at 1600°C. This molten regolith may be deposited
onto fused silica glass substrates as transparent thin ﬁlms
of primarily silica. Amorphous Si doped with 10% H to
reduce defects, doped into pn junctions and deposited as
thick ﬁlms ∼1–2 μm offers a bandgap of 1.75 eV and
efﬁciencies of 5–8%.15 Interconnection wires and mechanical structure may be constructed from Fe and Al and/
or Ti, respectively. The aluminium and silicon can be
extracted electrolytically from anorthite.
Silicon is typically produced through carbothermic
reduction of silica by carbon in an electric arc furnace at
2000°C to melt the silica which is reduced to metallurgical
grade ∼98% silicon and tapped. However, metallurgical
grade Si can be extracted from silica using the Metalysis
Fray Farthing Chen (FFC) electrolytic process at a much
more modest 900–1100°C with much lower energy consumption yielding >99% purity silicon.16 The Metalysis
FFC electrolytic process provides a generic chemical

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)
processing technique to reduce any mineral oxides into
>99% pure metal (in this context, we use the term metal to
include semiconductors). This process outputs metals in
powder form suitable as feedstock for metal 3D printing.
To reduce electricity consumed during electrolysis, it is
proposed that electrolysis may be implemented using solar
furnaces to raise the temperature of the electrolyte thermally and electrical energy used only for the electrolytic
reactions. Nevertheless, signiﬁcant amounts of electrical
power are required as 3% of the energy required for
electrolysis is for the electrolytic circuit.17 This will be
crucially dependent on the efﬁciency of conversion into
electrical energy. For silicon, metallurgical grade is 99%
(1% impurity) increasing to 99.9999% (100 ppm impurity) for solar grade and 99.999999999% (1 ppb impurity).
Solar cells do not require electronics grade silicon but may
be manufactured from metallurgical grade silicon only
with signiﬁcant further processing. Although metal purity
of 0.1% is sufﬁcient for most applications, solar cells
require very high purity ∼99.9999%. The implementation
of solar grade silicon manufacture on the Moon would
represent a considerable challenge.
Solar cell grade silicon can potentially be produced
through molten salt electrolysis of SiO2.18 It requires
dissolution of the metal oxide (SiO2) in a molten salt,
a metal-halogen compound (such as Na3AlF6-AlF3 or
CaCl2) at 1300 K. Molten aluminium chloride (AlCl3)
may be used under certain circumstances. The halogens
break the metal oxide bonds and metal can be extracted
electrolytically with the release of CO2 from a consumed carbon anode (which may be recycled). A liquid
aluminium–silicon cathode allows precipitation of Si
with reduced contamination from the melt. The similarities to the Metalysis FFC process invite possibilities that it may be adapted to this function. However,
secondary impurities in solar cells rapidly decrease
the efﬁciency of photovoltaic conversion – aluminium contamination must be under 10 ppm and other
metal impurities require even more stringent purity
conditions.
High purity of solar-grade Si is typically implemented
via a complex set of chemical processes.19 The conversion
of metallurgical grade to solar grade silicon begins with
the Siemens process involving treatment of Si particles
with HCl at 300°C producing trichlorosilane (SiHCl3)20:
Si þ 3HCl → SiHCl3 þ H2
Repeated fractional distillation generates solar grade
trichlorosilane which is then reduced with hydrogen at
1150°C to silicon that is deposited:
SiHCl3 þ H2 → Si þ 3HCl
This step is highly energy intensive and involves
precision control (as well as toxic chemicals) so is not
suited to lunar application. The use of silane SiH4 in
a ﬂuidised bed reactor is more energy efﬁcient. Silane gas
is formed by reducing silica using NaCl/AlCl3 catalyst at
high pressure:

Ellery

5
3SiO2 þ 6H2 þ 4Al → 3SiH4 þ 2Al2 O3

Silane is repeatedly fractionally distilled – it is often
employed for CVD. Thermal decomposition of SiH4 at
420°C yields semiconductor purity Si and H2 gas:
SiH4 → Si þ 2H2
Zone reﬁning is another suitable reﬁning process for
elevating purity.21 It involves passing an ingot of impure
material through a series of heaters to locally melt it and
resolidifying it – solidiﬁcation rejects the impurities into
the melt which is passed to the end of the ingot. Pure
amorphous silicon can be deposited through thermal
evaporation at ∼1600°C.
The next stage involves the manufacture of the solar
cell itself. The Czochralski process converts polycrystalline Si into single crystal Si by evaporating polysilicon in a fused quartz crucible with a single-crystal seed
under vacuum conditions. The Czochralski process itself
does not remove impurities for which zone reﬁning is
required. It is during the Czochralski process that dopants
are added in small amounts for the formation of pn
junctions. The whole cell must then be annealed at 900°C.
A rover using parabolic reﬂectors could generate 1300–
1500°C for the 50–60 W/cm2 required for regolith melting.
The chief difﬁculty will be in controlling the doping
process in solar cells. Doping with n-type dopants (such as
P) and p-type dopants (such as Al) requires rigorously
controlled thermal diffusion at 1000°C. One possible
approach involves a microwave drill applicator to create
local doping of silicon using a tip made from the doping
material. The tip is in contact with the silicon wafer which
causes local heating allowing dopant material to diffuse
into the wafer within the hotspot. Experiments with Al tips
on a 100–350 W microwave applicator at 2.45 GHz over
1 min doped regions of ∼1 mm diameter by ∼0.3 μm depth
with concentrations of 10191022/cm3 of dopant generating a pn junction barrier of 0.5–0.7 V.22 This is a very
promising approach to creating both pn junctions and
lasing media but its accuracy and controllability are not
established. Furthermore, P will require extraction from
KREEP minerals with the imposition of complex chemical
processing. For example, P may be extracted from the
mineral apatite (calcium phosphate Ca5(PO4)3(F,Cl,OH))
associated with rare earth deposits by warm HCl leaching:
Ca5 ðPO4 Þ3ðF,Cl,OHÞ þ HCl
→ CaCl2 þ H3 PO4 þ byproducts
4H3 PO4 þ 16C → P4 þ 6H2 þ 16CO at 850°C
Apatite may be initially rapidly leached with 2.0M HCl
with near 100% efﬁciency (it is more efﬁcient to acid leach
in two stages23):
Ca10 ðPO4 Þ6F2 þ 20HCl → 6H3 PO4 þ 10CaCl2 þ 2HF
Thence, the second reaction can proceed. Unfortunately, apatite is rare on the Moon. It may be possible
to use only the Al p-dopant alone or the dopants must be

sourced from Earth (usually P and B). The bulk photovoltaic effect does not require pn junctions but has extremely low efﬁciency – however, tungsten disulphide
nanotubes exhibit enhanced bulk photovoltaic effect but
this requires nanotube manufacture.24
The implementation of several layers for solar cell
construction requires a 3D printing approach to emplace
each layer to build the solar cells. Si inks based on doped
semiconductor nanoparticles have been demonstrated as
suitable for inkjet fabrication but they have limited
functionality. Aluminium back-reﬂectors, electrodes and
interconnects may be deposited by evaporation of aluminium at 2470°C or through screen-printing aluminium
paste which is cured at 300°C. The TiO2 layer (recoverable
from ilmenite processing) acts as an anti-reﬂective coating. TiO2 in its crystalline anatase form as thin ﬁlms is
a potential photosensitive semiconductor with or without
doping. Nanocrystalline n-type semiconductor TiO2 may
also be combined with an ultrathin metal layer to form
a Schottky diode solar cell.25 Polymeric solar cells lend
themselves to a variety of ﬁlm coating and printing
techniques including spin coating, spray coating, inkjet
printing, gravure printing and screen printing.26 Inkjet
printing, in particular, offers versatility.
It is reckoned in situ amorphous silicon solar cell efﬁciency will be around 5%.27 Solar cells undergo longterm degradation due to radiation exposure, especially
solar protons (requiring annealing at 750oC) and exhibit
diminished performance during the high temperatures of
the lunar day (requiring cooling).28 Assuming standard
solar cell performance is normalised at 25°C, the daytime
surface temperature on the Moon reaches 127°C yielding
a further reduction of 30% of the 5% efﬁciency (i.e. drop
of 1.5%–3.5% efﬁciency) in performance assuming
a temperature coefﬁcient of 0.3%/°C for amorphous silicon. The challenges of purifying and doping Si render in
situ fabrication of solar cells impractical. The use of iron
pyrite FeS2 for sustainable photovoltaics is a possibility
but their efﬁciencies are low at 1–3%29,30 and troilite/
sulphur must be sourced in meteoritic deposits. Kesterite
is a copper–zinc–tin sulphide mineral found in quartzsulphide deposits while its synthetic form is copper zinc
tin sulphide/selenide (Cu2ZnSnS(e)4)31 with photovoltaic
efﬁciencies ∼10%32 which can be inkjet-printed in thin
ﬁlms from ink formed from Cu, Zn and Sn metal salts
dissolved in dimethyl sulphoxide solvent. However,
kesterite is not indigenous to the Moon but could potentially be found in association with troilite FeS in asteroidal resources. A direct bandgap silicon allotrope with
a crystalline cage-structure Si24 may be formed by
compressing sodium and silicon into Na4Si24 crystals and
baking off the sodium at 100°C.33 This may potentially
offer higher photovoltaic efﬁciencies but requires imported Na from Earth. Perovskite has a crystal structure
with its general ABX3 structure that acts as an absorber on
a layer of Al2O3 where X = halogen, B = metal and A =
organic/inorganic. The ﬁrst perovskite was the mineral
calcium titanate (CaTiO3) with a bandgap of 3.46 eV
which is potentially manufacturable by sintering CaO and

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)

6
TiO2 derived from lunar resources at 900°C – perovskite
crystals may be manufactured into thin ﬁlms from salt
solution or sol–gel methods.34 Methylammonium lead
trihalide (CH3NH3PbX3) is the most widely adopted
perovskite offering photovoltaic efﬁciencies over 20%
matching silicon but do not tolerate UV exposure and
moisture (so require encapsulation in glass).35 However,
perovskite energy conversion is high only for small-scale
cells and do not scale up to uniformity due to ion migration
under illumination. Perovskites are currently being
adopted to contribute overlying shorter-wavelength absorbing layers to underlying longer-wavelength silicon
cells to form multijunction cells but their high lead content
is a detractor36 (though CaTiO3 is a potential option37).
Although not an issue for a lunar application, it is uncertain if perovskites can be adopted for lunar photovoltaics due to their marginal conversion efﬁciencies.
Semiconductor nano-crystals demonstrate the migration
of excited charge carriers into the valence band when the
incident energy exceeds three times the nanocrystal
bandgap energy.38 This provides for greater useful energy
output than is achievable with bulk semiconductors.
Silicon quantum dots have increased energy gap with
shrinking dot dimensions and exhibit conversion efﬁciencies of 60%.39 Both of these technologies require
sophisticated manufacturing methods.
Proposals to ‘print’ solar cells from lunar regolith using
a heat source – nominally a Fresnel lens, mirror or laser –
mounted on a rover which traverses the lunar surface
fusing regolith into solar cells are unrealistic. There are
several potential difﬁculties with this notion: (i) lunar
minerals yields lunar glass which will be coloured by iron
impurities; (ii) pure silica is rare on the Moon where
minerals are in silicate form which is unlikely to yield Si
with sufﬁcient purity for solar cells; (iii) although group III
acceptor dopant Al may be extracted from the lunar
mineral anorthite, the group V donor dopant P will be
much more difﬁcult to extract from KREEP minerals
requiring supply from Earth; (iv) the photovoltaic conversion efﬁciency from in situ manufactured solar cells is
unlikely to be >5%. Solar arrays are also susceptible to
some reliability issues resulting in anomalies and even
spacecraft failures despite their technological maturity.40,41
All spacecraft subsystems and component reliability follow
a Weibull distribution of the form
RðtÞ ¼ eðt=θÞ

β

(1)

where β = shape parameter such that β<1 models infant
mortality and β>1 models senility and θ = scale parameter
such that it is the time for 63% failure probability. High
power space systems tend to suffer from more infant
mortality (primarily due to solar array failures) than the
attitude and orbit control system (which is still signiﬁcant
with mechanical failures dominating over electrical) with
156 on-orbit failures on 129 spacecraft between 1980–
2005.42 Bizarrely, 45% of spacecraft failures were electrical compared with 32% mechanical (dominated by solar
array mechanism failure). Redundancy is the primary

means for increasing system reliability but for power
systems this is not practical. This illustrates that the current
approach to space power, despite its extensive legacy, may
not be the most appropriate approach.

Why solar concentrators are suitable
Solar concentrators have been employed to increase the
photovoltaic efﬁciency of solar cells.43 Here, we propose
their use for generating thermal energy – indeed, for in situ
resource processing, thermal energy constitutes the
dominant requirement for pyrochemical, electrochemical,
sintering/melting, etc., processes and most 3D printing
processes. A solar furnace comprises of a parabolic antenna which intercepts solar ﬂux and focusses it onto an
offset feed mirror which concentrates the beam to the
target. For any mirror or lens, focal length is the distance at
which parallel incident light is converged to the focal
point. The fundamental physical limitation on optical
performance is f-number, the ratio of focal length F to
aperture diameter D, which cannot be less than 0.5. For
a parabolic reﬂector, F ¼ D2 =16h where h = depth of the
parabola. Parabolic mirror concentrators of glass or polished metal focus the light from an aperture AL onto
a smaller absorber area AS. Rather than assuming the highﬁdelity polishing capabilities that are available on Earth,
we assume more modest grinding capabilities such as that
of the Mirror-O-Matic44 with simple Foucault knife edge
testing. We assume that the reﬂectivity of aluminised glass
is ∼0.78 while that for polished aluminium sheet is ∼0.82
and that for aluminised PTFE is 0.77. Polished metal is
stronger than glass structurally, but glass is typically used
as a protective covering. Energy losses are approximately
15% from absorption, reﬂection and scattering in the lens.
Errors in mirror or lens curvature is characterised by
angular deviation from its nominal value. The receiver has
a radius which intercepts all reﬂected incident radiation
given by


1
r ¼ 2p tan nσ
(2)
2
where p = parabolic radius, n = percentage of reﬂected
energy intercepted and σ = standard deviation of beam
spread angle. For a parabolic reﬂector
Creflect ¼

sin2 f cos2 ðf  θÞ
sin2 θ

(3)

where f ¼ tan1 ð1=ðd=8hÞ  ð2h=dÞÞ = rim angle
F
1
¼
D 4 tanðf=2Þ

(4)

Energy density (W/m2) is given by
Lr ΔT
Q_ ¼ Rfi fr fa ψ i 
C

(5)

where R = collector reﬂectivity, fi = beam fraction intercepted by receiver, fr = beam fraction incident on reﬂector,

Ellery
fa = beam fraction absorbed by receiver, ψ i = incident
radiation, Lr = receiver loss coefﬁcient, ΔT = temperature
differential between receiver and absorber and C = concentration ratio. The compound parabolic reﬂector comprises a parabolic reﬂector horn which funnels radiation
from the aperture to the absorber.45 It comprises a planar
entrance aperture, a totally internal reﬂecting proﬁle and
an exit aperture – they are not suited to high temperature
solar concentration so are primarily deployed for heating
working ﬂuids. They offer high concentration factors with
higher tolerance to misalignment errors at the cost of mirror
area size. The chief disadvantage of parabolic mirrors is that
high precision is complex to grind, but ﬂat mirror segments
can approximate a parabolic conﬁguration.
Traditional refractive lenses offer an alternative to
reﬂecting mirrors as solar concentrators, for example,
liquid water lenses offer concentration ratios of 100 or
more but this is insufﬁcient for lunar power generation
applications.46 However, lenses tend to be bulky. Fresnel
lens concentrators are thin lenses that are characterised by
engraved concentric prismatic grooves to emulate a conventional spherical lens. Each circular groove acts as
a prism at a slightly different angle according to its radius
47
to form p
a single
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ focus. Pitch between prisms is given by
d ¼ 1:5 λF . They refract light onto a focus using a thin
lens with the capacity for high temperature furnace
heating.48 Face down grooves offer enhanced performance by preventing the blocking of light.49 Suitable lens
material includes plastic or silicone. Plastics include
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) for its tolerance to
long-term exposure to sunlight and it may be moulded.
Silicone plastics offer higher refractive index than PMMA
but are ﬂexible. The non-rigid sculpted silicone can be
mounted onto a glass substrate. As refractors, they suffer
from chromatic aberration, but Fresnel lenses offer
compact conﬁgurations. We assume Fresnel lenses have
a speciﬁc mass of 0.25 kg/m2 including structure. A beeeye array of hexagonal lenses in which each side forms
a Fresnel lens groove is a variation on the Fresnel lens
concentrator.50 Solar concentrators may be implemented
in two stages with primary Fresnel lenses supplemented
by totally internal reﬂecting dielectric secondary optics
offering concentration ratios ∼103–104.51,52 The chief
disadvantage of Fresnel lenses is that the sharpness of the
facets determines the sharpness of the focus.
A segmented 25 m diameter ﬁlled aperture Fresnel lens
has been fabricated on a thin membrane independent of its
F-number.53 Long F-number is tolerant to surface ﬁgure
errors including cm-scale ripples perpendicular to the
membrane as long as the membrane retains its parallelism.
This is because light reﬂecting from a surface bump introduces a path delay of twice the ripple height. However,
traditional grinding and polishing is insufﬁcient for rendering required accuracies but 1D micro-etching can be
implemented using either chemical or tool etching to
remove ripples from ∼10 μm down to ∼100 nm. Fidelity
was controlled through thickness measurement through
interferometric feedback. The Fresnel lens was fabricated
in fused silica segments edged with Ti-alloy ﬁlm using

7
photolithographic tools that were subsequently precisionassembled using non-nested Origami folds. For the required λ/10 wavefront quality, a minimum of 5–10 μm
positioning accuracy in alignment is required. Thermal
control is essential to control thermal expansion as the
largest source of error and vibration isolation is essential
during assembly with planar robotic manipulators on
a table marked with ﬁducials.
For both parabolic reﬂectors and Fresnel lenses, the
ideal (Winston) concentrator ratio Cideal in the 3D case is
given by54
Cideal ¼

n2
sin2 θ

(6)

The geometric concentration ratio is given by
C¼

AL R2
¼ 2
AS
r

(7)

where n = refractive index of refracting medium = 1.5
typically, r = image radius = radius of the sun, R = distance
to the sun and θ =acceptance half-angle subtended by the
sun at collector = 4.653 mrad. This yields concentration
ratios ∼10,000 typically. If θ = 90o, the maximum concentration ratio Cideal is 46,200. The absorber temperature
is given by55
Tab ¼ Ts ðð1  RÞτðα=εÞðC=Cideal ÞÞ

1=4

(8)

where Ts = solar temperature = 6000 K, τ = transmittivity,
α = absorptivity and ε = emittance. Transmittance for
a Fresnel lens is analysed in Reference 56 In an ideal case,
maximum absorber temperature is 6000 K where α/ε → 1.
In a non-ideal case, 1 kW/m2 projected onto a 1 m2 Fresnel
lens concentrates energy by 2650 times onto a focal point,
that is, 265 W/cm2. Concentration ratio is deﬁned as the
ratio of aperture-to-receiver area
Cmax ¼

r2
ðf tan θÞ

2

(9)

where θ = solar divergence angle = 0.25o. The maximum
temperature T achievable by a solar concentrator is given
by
T¼


1=4
Cmax S0
σ

(10)

where σ = Stefan–Boltzmann constant = 5.67 × 108 W/
m2/K4 and S0 =solar radiation density = 1360 W/m2 at
Earth orbit. Sintering requires heat ﬂuxes of 50 W/cm2 to
generate regolith temperatures of 1000°C. For Ca = 1000
(such as a 3 m lens focused on a 5 cm diameter furnace
spot), Tmax >2000 K which is more than sufﬁcient to melt
common metals and silica/quartz. A larger solar furnace
can generate temperatures of 2200–2700°C to potentially
vaporise lunar regolith. However, increased pressure can
also reduce crucible temperatures required for a Fresnel
lens. Liquid metals are highly efﬁcient at transferring heat
at high temperature enabled by mechanical pumps based

8
on ceramic.57 Although ceramics are brittle under tensile
loads, aluminium nitride composite was used as the primary pump material with a similar thermal coefﬁcient of
thermal expansion as graphite used for piping. This
suggests that concentrated solar energy may be conveyed
at high efﬁciency using hot liquid Al with alumina
ceramic.
Solar concentrator-based sintering offers a thermal
lance technique more suited to lunar application but
without the high-power precision of the laser. Fresnel
lenses or parabolic mirrors direct heat to their immovable
foci but locating ﬁbre optic cabling at the foci allows
thermal energy to be directed as desired. Highly concentrated solar energy can be exploited for energising
a wide range of metallurgical and chemical processes such
as surface hardening of steels, cladding of intermetallics
onto steels and sintering of metallic powders.58 The same
can be exploited in the context of a solar power-energised
3D printer, to melt layers of sand, for example, Markus
Kayser’s Solar Sinterer.59 Silica with a melting point of
1600°C is usually sintered in a high temperature furnace
but the addition of Ca, Al, Mg and Cl lowers the melting
temperature to 500–700°C to permit low power sintering
at 200 W.60 We have conducted Fresnel lens experiments
to use concentrated solar heating to melt aluminium alloy
onto silicone plastic substrates as a prerequisite to a solarenergised multi-material 3D printer (Figure 1).
The chief difﬁculty for bulk material processing is in
uniform heating of the volume of material. Optical
waveguide transmission lines from an array of solar
concentrators can distribute heat through the volume. A
parabolic reﬂector can collect and concentrate solar energy
from the primary concentrator focussed onto the secondary concentrator comprising a truncated conical quartz
rod coupled to an optical waveguide transmission line
(optical ﬁbre bundle) to deliver a high temperature spot to
any speciﬁc location to implement pyrochemical processing.61 Multiple solar concentrators may be arrayed to
focus energy through multiple ﬁbre bundles into a thermal
reactor to generate temperatures exceeding 2000°C. A
polymer-clad silica-core step-index multimode low-loss
optical ﬁbre was employed for the ﬂexible ﬁbres.62 The
quartz rod similarly coupled to multiple output ﬁbre ends
to deliver thermal energy directly into the thermal reactor.63 The optical chain efﬁciency was 33% with losses
primarily due to losses at the coupling interfaces. This
technique can be adapted to sintering/melting within a 3D
printer arrangement. A Fresnel lens-based solar concentrator was adopted with ﬁbre-optic coupling to demonstrate the efﬁcient delivery of ﬁltered photosynthetically
active radiation of high intensity to a greenhouse as part of
a bioregenerative life support facility.64 In a vacuum,
cooling of the focal point may be accomplished by circulating silicone oil around the quartz rod to drive
a Rankine cycle engine. Model predictive control is
a robust approach to the control of solar-thermal reactors
due to its ability to compensate for dead times.65
The use of polymers for optical devices and optical ﬁbres
is well-established. High density arrays of 20–100 μm

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)
sized polymer refractive lenses (lensets) used for optical
devices can be manufactured through a variety of techniques including inkjet technology based on pulsed piezoceramic microchannel nozzles66 and spotting arrays of
silicon microcantilevers.67 These approaches render
plausibility to the use of silicone plastics for small optical
components. Plastic Fresnel lenses are traditionally manufactured through compression moulding and moulds may
be 3D printed. However, glass is commonly adopted – on
the Moon, carbon is comparatively rare rendering polymers as a less favoured, though not implausible, option.
Glass is common to both reﬂector and refractor-type solar
concentrators and ﬁbre optics. Silica is the starting point for
the manufacture of ceramics, refractory components,
glasses, quartz and silicon. Glass is a mixture of silica with
alkaline and alkaline-earth oxide additives. Soda-lime
glass with its low melting point of 860oC constitutes
75% SiO2, 15% Na2O and 10% CaO but sodium is rare on
the Moon. Similarly, B2O3 for heat resistant borosilicate
glass (approximate melting range ∼100°C) is also rare on
the Moon. Aluminosilicate glass comprises 57% SiO2,
20% Al2O3, 12% MgO, 5% CaO, 4% B2O3 and 1% Na2O
with a melting temperature of 1130°C. Alumina affords
strength and durability – sapphire (corundum Al2O3 with
traces of other metals) glass is extremely hard. Macor is
a machineable glass-ceramic that is a thermal and electrical
insulator stable up to 1000°C similar to borosilicate glass
with a coefﬁcient of thermal expansion that matches most
metals. Most of its constituents 46% SiO2, 17% MgO, 16%
Al2O3 and 10% K2O are available on the Moon though its
7% B2O3 and 4% F constituents are not. Lunar regolith
may be melted into glass. Anorthositic glass is an aluminosilicate glass with a melting temperature of 1550°C,
but it includes signiﬁcant amounts of FeO which darkens
glass – this would have to be removed almost entirely. This
increases the complexity of glass manufacture on the Moon
considerably. Fused silica glass is pure silica, but it requires
a melting temperature of 1710°C, but this is only 160°C
higher than that of anorthite. Hence, temperatures of up to
2000 K are required which can be met using Fresnel lens
solar concentrators in the 1500–2000 K range.68 Fresnel
lenses of fused silica glass can provide the temperatures
required for melting fused silica glass. The effects on
different target geometries have been analysed.69

Approaches to solar-electric conversion
Radioisotope heating units (RHUs) are commonly
(though not exclusively) used to supply heat only without
conversion to electric power, for example, the Russian
Angel RHU delivers 8.5 W of heat. However, we are
concerned with the conversion of thermal energy into
electrical energy. Thermal-to-electric conversion is commonly adopted in high intensity thermal sources based on
nuclear processes. The thermocouple effect involves two
different conductors forming a junction. When one
junction is maintained at a known reference temperature,
a different junction at a different temperature will generate
a voltage. Thermocouples may be stacked in series to form

Ellery

9

Figure 1. (a) 1 m2 Fresnel lens; (b) melting aluminium–zinc alloy chips; (c) deposited as molten metal onto a silicon plastic substrate.

a thermopile. Most thermocouples are based on Ni alloys,
Pt/Rh alloys, and W/Rh or Pt/Mo alloys, the latter for high
temperature furnaces. They create power from heat differentials but these materials are rare on the Moon. Radioisotope thermal generators (RTG) operate through the
decay of radioactive isotopes to generate heat which is
converted into electrical energy. RTG isotopes to date
have been 238Pu offering a speciﬁc power of 0.568 Wth/g
and half-life of 88 years, but Pu is scarce and difﬁcult to
manufacture. Possible replacements include 241Am with
a speciﬁc power of 0.115 Wth/g and half-life of 433 years
for long duration missions, and 90Sr with a speciﬁc power
of 0.935 Wth/g and half-life of 29 years for shorter

missions. 241Am is generated by 241Pu decay in greater
volumes than 238Pu. The primary mechanisms for energy
conversion to electrical energy in nuclear power sourcess
are thermoelectric conversion for low powers (adopted in
RTGs) and Stirling cycle dynamic conversion for high
power (adopted in nuclear reactors). Longitudinal thermoelectric conversion involves the Seebeck effect due to
temperature differences as the transduction mechanism
with ZT ¼ S 2 =ρλ where S = Seebeck coefﬁcient, ρ =
electrical resistivity and λ = thermal conductivity. The
anomalous Nernst effect is a transverse thermoelectric
effect in thin-ﬁlm ferromagnets such as Fe3Al, but it is
much diminished at 2 μV/K in comparison to the Seebeck

10
effect.70 Semiconductors tend to offer higher thermoelectric performance than metals by virtue of its banding
of electronic energy states. As temperature increases,
electrical conductivity in semiconductors increases unlike
in metals. Silicon–germanium alloy offers superior performance at T∼1000°C with ZT ∼0.7. Thermoelectric
(Seebeck) conversion in GPHS RTGs is accomplished
through SiGe alloy with a conversion efﬁciency of 5–7%.
Closed cycle turbine energy conversion offers higher
efﬁciency (at the cost of mechanical complexity and ﬂuid
handling) than static conversion mechanisms. The
Brayton and Rankine cycles are typically adopted in gas
turbines and steam turbines, respectively. The Brayton
cycle comprises four steps on an isobaric single-phase
gaseous working ﬂuid: (i) isentropic compression; (ii)
isobaric heating; (iii) isentropic expansion and (iv) isobaric cooling. The Rankine cycle is similar to the Brayton
cycle but is applied to a two-phase gas/liquid working
ﬂuid: (i) isentropic compression of liquid; (ii) isobaric
heating into vapour; (iii) isentropic expansion of vapour
and (iv) isobaric condensation to liquid. However, Stirling
cycle conversion requires a hot/cold temperature ratio
Th =Tc ∼ 2:0  2:5 rather than the 3+required of Brayton
and Rankine cycles, reducing the radiator size. The
Stirling cycle comprises four closed thermodynamic steps
on the working ﬂuid: (i) isothermal expansion; (ii) constant volume cooling; (iii) isothermal compression and
(iv) constant volume heating. The heat source transmits
heat to a low heat capacity working ﬂuid and then to a heat
sink. Efﬁciency is enhanced by maximising the hot and
cold temperature difference. Stirling cycle dynamic
conversion can increase GPHS RTG conversion efﬁciency
to 30%. Stirling converters can be adapted to higher power
nuclear reactors, for example, 5 kW Stirling converter
modules for lunar applications which can be arrayed for
a 50 kW nuclear reactor.71
Nuclear reactors are commonly proposed to support
lunar bases, but they are currently not under development
nor can they be leveraged from in situ resources within the
constraints of near-term technology development. Only
three types of nuclear reactor have ﬂown in space, all bar
one Russian.72 Molten sodium offers the ideal working
ﬂuid for its high thermal capacity and conductivity, high
boiling point and low melting point – it is used in alkalimetal thermal-to-electric converter (AMTEC). NaK alloy
is liquid at lower temperatures making it ideal as the
working ﬂuid for low power nuclear reactors. An alternative is high pressure liquid water which is used as
a coolant in pressurised water reactors (PWR), but this
requires sturdy structures unsuitable to the mass constraints of space applications (though this constraint only
applies if it to be delivered from Earth). Single phase (noncondensing) He gas coolant is a gaseous alternative to
sodium-based and water-based coolant in nuclear reactors,
for example, it is employed in a Brayton cycle in the gas
cooled Magnox reactor. He is inert so it may be used at
high temperature and may also be used in some types of
variable conductance heat pipes. As these latter heat
transfer processes involve recycling He gases, the low

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)
leakages can be readily re-supplied from regolith volatiles,
He and H2O. However, these are untested technologies in
the space domain. The American SNAP-10A reactor used
uranium-zirconium hydride (U-ZrH1.7) fuel with NaK
liquid metal coolant. It used SiGe thermoelectric power
conversion with an efﬁciency of <1.5%.
The Russian BUK and TOPAZ reactors were stainless
steel structures (limiting operating temperatures to 900 K)
using NaK liquid metal cooling loops. Si0.78Ge0.22 thermoelectric conversion is used currently, but lead tellurides
and silver-antimony-germanium telluride have also been
explored but are limited to 825 K. BUK SiGe thermoelectric conversion has an efﬁciency of 2–5% while
TOPAZ used 5 kW thermionic conversion with an efﬁciency of 10–15%. Thermoelectric silicides are ideal in the
temperature range 330–580°C and may be sourced from
in situ resources – FeSi2, CoSi and Mg2Si offer ZTmax of
0.2, 0.2 and 1.2, respectively, where ZT ¼ S 2 σT =κ =
thermoelectric ﬁgure-of-merit, S = Seebeck coefﬁcient,
σ = electrical conductivity, κ = thermal conductivity and
T = absolute temperature.73 Mg2Si may be manufactured
from lunar resources by heating SiO2 with Mg powder
recovered from lunar olivine. Similar thermoelectric
powders (Bi2Te3) can be processed by pulsed laser melting
suggesting amenability of Mg2Si to additive manufacturing.74 High ZT requires minimal thermal conductivity
which requires adding 10% impurities (nominally Bi and
Sb but these cannot be readily sourced in situ). Thermoelectric conversion efﬁciency drops with temperature,
but skudderites (CoAs3) offer superior performance at
elevated temperature. Skudderites are compounds
with rare earth elements like cerium or ytterbium encased
in cages of cobalt and antimony, but such materials
would require complex extraction methods. Thermoelectric conversion is however poor in efﬁciency though
the embedding of 0.2% soft magnetic nanoparticles
(such as Fe, Ni or Co) may improve such efﬁciencies.75
High temperature 2D metallic photonic crystals may be
etched into a tantalloy (Ta with 3% W) substrate offering
high temperature (>900°C) thermal-to-electric conversion.76 The photonic crystals constitute periodic arrays
of cylindrical cavities of period a, radius r and depth
d that determine the cutoff frequency. However, this
requires sophisticated processing methods of manufacture. We discard these static thermoelectric conversion
techniques as unsuitable except perhaps as part of a
staged approach.
Solar concentrators may be used in conjunction with
vacuum tube-based thermionic conversion to generate
electrical energy.77 Thermionic conversion requires vacuum tube materials – fused silica glass, tungsten, nickel,
Kovar and calcium oxide which can be sourced on the
Moon – a calcium oxide coated tungsten cathode may be
sourced from anorthite minerals and nickel–iron meteorites; a nickel control grid and anode may be sourced
from nickel–iron meteorites; Kovar wiring may be
sourced from nickel–iron meteorites; and a fused silica
glass tube may be sourced from silicate minerals. Vacuum
tube-based technology has the advantage of being highly

Ellery

11

radiation-tolerant unlike solid state devices. Microminiature vacuum tubes are based on semiconductor fabrication methods to implement short micrometre vacuum
distances between cathode, control grid and anode increasing the efﬁciency of electron emission. They offer
electron speeds close to c compared with 107 cm/s in
silicon. The electron gun operates either through thermionic or ﬁeld effect emission. Field emission microminiature vacuum tubes have cold cathodes that emit electrons
through electric ﬁeld emission on the application of
a strong electric ﬁeld >5 × 107 V/cm rather than thermal
heating. Field emission is generated from a sharply
pointed tungsten tip held at high negative potential ∼kV
with respect to another tungsten electrode. They are
typically cold scandate electrodes comprising porous
tungsten impregnated with nanocrystalline scandium
oxide for a low work function of 1.45 eV, permitting
higher current density without heating. Field emission can
be enhanced with thermal heating. Field emission is approximately described by the simpliﬁed Fowler–
3=2
Nordheim equation given by J ¼ ðA0 E2 =fÞebf =E. To
reduce sputtering of the ﬁeld emission tip, applied voltages should be <150 V. A thin porous layer of MgO
coated onto a cold cathode which is shaped into a sharp
point acts as a source of electrons.78 Both ﬁeld emission
vacuum diode and triode have been manufactured.79
However, our requirement is for hot thermionic emission which can also be implemented in a microminiature
thermionic vacuum tube.80
Thermionic emission involves no moving parts but
constitutes a lightweight and compact heat engine.
Thermionic emission is the emission of electrons from
a hot cathode, typically a coated metal ﬁlament heated to
a minimum of 800°C, across a gap to a colder anode onto
which electrons condense. Thermionic emission only
occurs if thermal energy exceeds the work function of the
material. It requires electrons to be energised beyond the
work function, W ¼ ef  EF where e = electronic
charge, f = electrostatic potential and EF = Fermi energy
level determined by dopant concentration. The current
density generated by thermionic emission is given by the
Richardson-Dushman equation
Jtherm ¼ λAT 2 ef=kT

(11)

where f ¼ W  eðΔVce  ΔVs Þ = activation energy, W =
work function ∼2–6 eV (dependent on the material, e.g.
4.52 eV for tungsten), A = Richardson-Dushman constant
= 120 A/cm2K2, λ = material-speciﬁc emission correction
factor, ΔVce = collector-emitter voltage, ΔVs = Seebeck
voltage and T = cathode temperature. The work function is
the minimum amount of energy required to liberate
electrons.81 Because the work function of most materials
exceeds 3 eV, temperatures >1000°C are required to
generate energy densities >1 W/cm2. An anode collects
the electrons at much lower temperature ∼300 K nominally. Vacuum tubes also obey Child’s law that the anode
current is proportional to the two-thirds power of anode
voltage. Refractory metals are those tolerant of high

temperatures due to their high melting points (above
2000°C) such as tungsten, tantalum, molybdenum, niobium and rhenium – tungsten has the highest melting point
at 3422°C. They are processed through powder metallurgy
in which 90% W powder is compacted and sintered in
10% binder of Fe and Ni followed by cold working.
Tungsten ﬁlament permits heating of the hot cathode
which requires a minimum temperature of 1400°C for
electron emission from tungsten. Usually, the tungsten
ﬁlament heats a surrounding nickel metal sheet wrapped
around the ﬁlament. It is the nickel metal sheet cathode in
this case that emits the thermionic electrons. Unfortunately, tungsten has a high work function of 4.32 eV
so it is coated with an oxide with lower work function to
increase electron emission at lower temperature <1000°C.
There are several approaches to maximising performance
in thermionic power conversion including the use of
secondary coatings.82 Commonly used elements include
Cs with φ = 1.96 eV, Ba with φ = 2.52 eV, Sr with φ =
2.6 eV, Ca with 2.87 eV, Li with φ = 2.9 eV, Th with φ =
3.4 eV and even Al with φ = 4.06 eV in various combinations (Table 4). They are converted to oxide to provide
high temperature tolerance.
Performance is enhanced with low cathode work
function (T∼1500 K) to increase current density but high
difference between cathode and anode work functions
with the cathode work function being at least 1 eV higher
than that for the anode, that is, even smaller anode work
function, V = WCWA∼0.5 eV. Suitable coatings on the
cathode are alkaline earth oxides, typically a mix of
thorium, barium, strontium and calcium oxides to lower
the work function of the cathode to 1.1 eV for 600–800°C
electron emission. The most commonly used coatings are
cerium oxide, lanthanum oxide and thorium oxide. Impregnating the cathode with coatings of oxides of Ba–Sr–
Ca and/or Sc2O3 also yield lower work functions but Ba
evaporates requiring replenishment. Another mixture
BaO-CaO-Al2O3 in a 4:1:1 ratio is common.83 The latter –
calcium oxide – is the only readily extractable alkaline
earth oxide from lunar resources but may be supplemented
by alumina for robustness (also extractible from lunar
resources) to yield a work function of 2.87 eV. N-type
doping reduces space charging and so thermionic efﬁciency can reach ∼20%. Oxide-coated cathodes are used
in small vacuum tubes but not high-power tubes due to
sputtering. Thermionic energy conversion exploits electrons as the working ﬂuid in a vacuum which ﬂow from the
emitter to the collector through a circuit. However, there is

Table 4. Work functions of common cathode elements.
Element
Cs
Ca
K
Li
W

Work function (eV)
1.95
2.87
2.29
2.9
4.32–5.22

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)

12
a limit to current density as electrons build up in the
cathode–anode gap creating a space charge barrier described by the Child-Langmuir law. The space charge
effect of large numbers of electrons mutually repelling
each other and the positive cathode attracting electrons
back forming an electron charge cloud around the anode
decreases thermionic conversion efﬁciency. The space
charge prevents electrons from being emitted from the
cathode. There are several ways to minimise this84: (i)
employ readily ionised caesium vapour (or, to a lesser
extent, methane), though K as another low ionisation
energy alkali metal may be substituted; (ii) minimise interelectrode distance ∼10 μm; (iii) employ magnetic/
electrostatic ﬁelds to control electron movement – the
electrostatic approach inserts a control grid between the
cathode and anode. A plasma of Cs ions (with low ionisation energy of 3.9 eV) reduces the space charge effect
effectively decreasing the cathode work function to
∼1.5 eV. Cs must be continuously supplied limiting the
thermionic converter lifetime, for example, it is the Cs
reservoir that limits the lifetime of the TOPAZ reactor to
1 year. Closing the cathode–anode gap to ∼5–10 μm
prevents electron space charge build up – to prevent rapid
cooling of the cathode, thermally insulating SiO2 spacers
may be employed. Alternatively, the addition of a third,
positively charged ‘gate’ electrode in the 100 μm gap can
disperse the electron space charge cloud without the introduction of ions. To prevent gate currents, the gate
should be electron-transparent such as alumina membranes. The application of an electric ﬁeld can lower the
work function barrier and enhance thermionic emission –
nano-protrusions at the cathode exhibit the same effect. At
a low anode temperature of 300 K, back thermionic
emission from the anode can be signiﬁcantly diminished.85
The conversion efﬁciency from thermal energy to electrical
energy including thermal emission, conduction and radiation losses is given by
η¼



Je Vout Je Wcathode  Wanode
¼
Qi
Qi
e

(12)

Thermionic emission is limited by the Carnot limit of
44% at Tcathode = 1800 K and Tanode = 1000 K. The 5 kW
Russian TOPAZ-II (thermionic experiment with conversion in active zone) space nuclear reactor used thermionic
conversion – 15–20% efﬁcient thermionic converters were
used with a hot cathode temperature of TC = 1650°C and
cold anode temperature of TA = 650°C with a low-pressure
Cs environment.86 Although the theoretical efﬁciency of
this electrical heat engine is 30%, practical efﬁciencies are
limited to 15%. However, the use of electric potential
shaping can increase efﬁciencies up to 40%.87 In terms of
manufacture, vacuum tubes require the implementation of
an air bridge or suspended trench ﬁlament to create the
evacuated space using planar technology. This will present
a challenge, though not an insurmountable one, to 3D
printing manufacturing processes with lens micromachining
with resolution 0.1 μm for surface structuring of Fresnel
lenses.88

Enhancement of thermionic emission with staging has
yielded some success. A serial thermionic–thermoelectric
conversion stage from 1000°C has demonstrated 30%
efﬁciencies.89 However, photon-enhanced thermionic
emission (PETE) based on combined photovoltaic and
thermionic emission from a hot semiconductor offers
greater efﬁciencies of conversion. It is ideally suited to
solar concentrators at 1000 sun intensity as a source of
both heat and light to pass through a transparent quartz
enclosure ∼5–10 mm in size. Photon-enhanced thermionic
emission employs two different electrodes in a parallel
plate arrangement separated by >1 μm with a p-type
semiconductor cathode and a nominally metallic anode
(such as nickel).90 Solar photons with energy above the
cathode semiconductor’s bandgap liberate valence electrons of the semiconductor cathode into its conduction
band; these conduction band electrons are heated thermionically and accelerated across the vacuum gap to the
anode. It is the combination of illumination and thermalisation of electrons that yields the enhanced performance91 given by

JPETE ¼ ne q

qkT
2πme

1=2
eE=kT  Jtherm

(13)

where ne = electron concentration, me = electron mass and
E = vcva = cathode–anode work function difference,
The cathode ideally would be a semiconductor with
a bandgap of ∼1.5 eV (e.g. CuInS2 has a bandgap of
1.53 eV) to absorb sunlight efﬁciently. Photon-enhanced
thermionic emission efﬁciencies are given by
η¼




σTh
Tc
1
1
S0
Th

(14)

The PETE cell comprises a vacuum sandwiched between
a GaAs anode and a heated GaAs cathode from which
electron boil-off supplementing photoelectron generation.92
It can yield up to 30–50% efﬁciencies and higher if supplemented with secondary thermal conversion processes –
this is particularly in the case where high waste heat is
removed from the anode into a second thermoelectric (e.g.
Mg2Si) conversion stage.93,94 In our application, thermionic
conversion is the dominant process limiting conversion
efﬁciencies to 15–20%. In PETE, efﬁcient photonic conversion requires low semiconductor bandgap.
Selenium (which is extractable from asteroid-derived
lunar resources) is a semiconductor with a bandgap of
1.95 eV that has been integrated into a multilayer TiO2/Se/
MoOx solar cell with Au contacts and exhibits an efﬁciency of 5.7% (which drops to 3.9% for TiO2/Se/Au)
under one sun exposure95 – it is plausible that molybdenum could be replaced by tungsten. However, selenium
is limited by its melting point of 221°C to mild thermal
conditions rendering it unsuitable as a cathode material –
at best it might be employed as anodic material. Under
normal operation, the thermal heating required in PETE is
modest compared with that employed in pure thermionic
conversion (∼1000°C) but this assumes a relatively low

Ellery
bandgap semiconductor. The cathode should be a p-type
semiconductor such as Al-doped Si but Si offers maximum efﬁciencies of 30% at 580°C with 1000 sun illumination due to its non-optimal bandgap. Undoped silicon
(extractable from widespread lunar silicates) as a cathodic
material has a relatively low bandgap of 1.1 eV offering
higher efﬁciencies (though suboptimal) of 15% at elevated
temperatures >500°C and has a much higher melting point
of 1414°C. Aluminium-doped haematite photocathodic
coatings96 (formed from ilmenite-derived iron heated in
oxygen) or other photoconductive coatings are also
promising. Suitable high temperature metal electrodes
include nickel and nickel–titanium–aluminium alloy.
Photon-enhanced thermionic emission may be combined
with other energy conversion mechanisms at lower temperatures (bottom cycle) at the anode to potentially yield
conversion efﬁciencies up to 70%. This approach promises signiﬁcant efﬁciency gains over pure thermionic
conversion with efﬁciencies of 30% being a modest expectation (prior to analysis or experiment).

Approaches to energy storage
We must consider the storage of energy through the twoweek lunar night. There exist exotic proposals for thermal
energy storage during the lunar night by running a heat
engine powered by a heat exchanger pipe from a subsurface region of regolith melted during the lunar day.97
Additionally, given that temperatures during the lunar
night reach as low as 100 K globally and 40 K at the lunar
poles, superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES)
might be considered. Superconducting magnetic energy
storage requires superconducting wires – niobium–
titanium in an aluminium matrix offers a critical magnetic ﬁeld as high as 15 T but has a critical temperature of
10 K; yttrium–barium–copper oxide offers a superior
critical magnetic ﬁeld of 140 T and a much higher critical
temperature of 92 K. The former is impractical but the
latter requires only 8 K of active cooling. In the context of
ISRU, however, SMES becomes unviable – copper is
rariﬁed on the Moon while niobium, yttrium and barium
will be difﬁcult to extract from KREEP deposits. However, the most commonly proposed method is chemical
battery, for example, Li-ion comprising a lithiated metal
(such as Co or Ni) oxide cathode and graphite anode
immersed an organic electrolyte with dissolved lithium
salts. Li-ion batteries offer a speciﬁc energy density of
∼250 Wh/kg and a low rate of self-discharge so trickle
charging is not required nor do they need reconditioning.98
However, they cannot be discharged at a rate exceeding
C/2 where C = charge capacity (Ah). Li–S batteries potentially offer much higher energy densities and with
reduced ﬂammability. Lithium polymer batteries with
their slim proﬁle and high speciﬁc power ∼200 Wh/kg are
suited to short mission cubesat applications with low
power requirements where their low ∼600 charge/
discharge cycling is not a hindrance.99 Li-air batteries
use lithium metal which is reversibly converted to lithium
peroxide offering potential on Earth – a lunar equivalent

13
could potentially be potassium–oxygen batteries. It has
been proposed that lithium’s superior reducing power to
hydrogen can be exploited for reducing in situ minerals
oxides to metal.100 On Earth, Li is sourced from chloride
brines formed in salt ﬂats dominantly in Bolivia, Chile and
Argentina representing ﬁnite resources. Unfortunately, Li
is not readily available on the Moon. Nickel–cadmium
batteries with their lower performance were superseded
by Li-based batteries. Rechargeable nickel–iron batteries
may be feasible as a power storage mechanism comprising
a nickel oxide-hydroxide (Ni(OH)) cathode and an iron
anode emplaced in a KOH electrolyte.101 Fe and Ni may be
sourced from NiFe meteorite resources and K can be mined
from KREEP minerals such as orthoclase. They were very
robust and were used in the V1 ﬂying bomb. A more
modern version would replace iron with aluminium extracted from lunar anorthite. However, over the two-week
night, these batteries would self-discharge by ∼10–20%.
A fuel cell is an electrochemical machine that converts
chemical energy of its fuel (such as water) into electrical
energy without combustion. Electrons are released at the
anode from hydrogen ions while the oxygen ions migrate
through the solid polymer electrolyte to the cathode. Water
electrolysis is required for rechargeability in fuel cells
which requires polymer electrolyte/proton exchange
membrane (PEM), most commonly Naﬁon. Fuel cells
such as alkaline or PEM types have much higher density
than batteries due to external H2/O2 fuel storage but this
makes them volumetrically bulky. Alkaline fuel cells –
which are more robust than PEM-type – use a KOH
electrolyte with a saturated separator of asbestos (for
which kaolinite might be substituted) and Fe or Ni
electrodes. In human missions, they are used in conjunction
with a scrubber to prevent carbon poisoning. Lunar bases
will produce signiﬁcant amounts of biowaste – carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen – which may be pyrolysed into syngas
(hydrogen and carbon monoxide) which can be converted
into methanol. H2 may be combined with CO to form
methanol which may be readily stored and then burned for
energy. Methanol and oxygen are the fuels required for a subcategory of PEM fuel cells which produce water and carbon
dioxide for recycling though their efﬁciencies are low.
NaBH4/H2O2 PEM micro-fuel cell offers high power density
∼700 Wh/kg102 but they involve ﬂuid control. Appropriate
polymers for fuel cell membranes would be difﬁcult (though
not insurmountable) to manufacture given the paucity of
carbon on the Moon. Furthermore, a separate electrolyser is
required to render fuel cells rechargeable. Batteries and fuel
cells offer high energy density (capacity to store energy) but
low power density (rate of transfer of energy) in spite of some
successes. Super-capacitors are a hybrid between a capacitor
and a rechargeable battery. They have enormously increased
charge storage capacity. Supercapacitors offer high power
density with moderate energy density ∼20 Wh/kg with
measurable charge state, no memory effects and high charge/
discharge cycling capacity.103 They employ a double layer of
thin aluminium foil electrodes covered with activated carbon
soaked in KOH/H2O electrolyte separated by a thin porous
insulator of woven glass ﬁbres (such as cobalt oxide). Carbon

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)

14
powder electrodes offer very large surface area for the
storage of charge. Similarly, K must be mined from KREEP
minerals which imposes challenging chemical processing
requirements.
Layer-by-layer self-assembly may be applied to the
construction of PEM fuel cells and electrical double layer
supercapacitors.104 It is possible to create complex components from inks such as Li-ion micro-batteries ∼1 mm2
using a mixture of lithium and silver nanoparticles in solution. The inks solidify into the battery’s anode and cathode
and can be built layer by layer. An enclosure is capped on
and the electrolyte added. The construction of batteries
through 3D printing has been demonstrated in a zinc-air
cell.105 A customised Cartesian gantry robot conﬁguration
of a 3D printer was used to implement freeform deposition
using different cartridges. Two plunger-based extruder deposition heads with integral heaters were dedicated to
plastic/metal and liquid/pastes, respectively. The material for
each printer head was easily changed by substituting different syringe cartridges in each extruder head. The zinc-air
battery comprised multiple layers with Zn anode particles in
a KOH solution surrounded by a silver paste layer, carbon
black/MnO2 cathode catalyst in KOH solution electrolyte,
and a pre-cast separator layer of insulating ceramic foam
overlying an air (oxygen) cathode surrounded by a silver
paste. The assembly was mounted within an ABS plastic
casing with copper wiring to the electrodes. In addition,
a passive ﬂexure joint of silicone plastic between rigid ABS
plastic members was fabricated. The silicone was impregnated with carbon black while embedded wires of silver/
methylcellulose paste were also fabricated within the joint –
a simple actuator. This illustrates the potential of 3D printing
to manufacture energy storage devices though the zinc-air
battery, Li-ion battery and PEM for rechargeable fuel cells
are unsuited to lunar deployment due to the lack of suitable
materials in lunar feedstock.

Why ﬂywheel energy storage is suitable
Flywheels (electromechanical batteries) have been proposed for supplying excess power of peak loads above
base loads (typically 55% above peak loads).106,107 They
are also proposed as a suitable energy storage mechanism
for vehicles.108 Flywheels for energy storage are robust
with zero depth-of-discharge, insensitivity to the number
of charge/discharge cycles ∼107 and offer both high energy density ∼100 kJ/kg and high power density ∼50 Wh/
kg. A ﬂywheel is a rapidly rotating thin rimmed wheel that
stores rotational kinetic energy electromechanically operating as a motor and releases it as a generator. The
amount of energy stored is proportional to the square of its
rotational speed, typically 20,000–50,000 r/min
1
1
E ¼ mr2 w2 ¼ Iw2
4
2

(15)

2
2
þ rin
Þ = moment of inertia for
where I ¼ ð1=2Þmðrex
a thin-walled cylinder. Maximum energy/unit mass of the
ﬂywheel requires decreasing the rotor moment of inertia

and increasing its speed. The highest energy density E is
available when the thin rim is constrained by hoop stresses
while radial stresses due increasing rim thickness are
reduced. The energy capacity is limited by the tensile
strength of the rotor material to hoop stresses
such that
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
tangential velocity is given by v ¼ σ=ρ where σ/ρ =
speciﬁc tensile strength of the material. Hence, the tangential velocity is constant for the material irrespective of
the rotor radius, that is, rotation rate is inversely proportional to the rotor diameter.
Energy density of a ﬂypﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
wheel is given by E=m ¼ K σ=ρ ∼ 100 J/kg typically
where K = shape factor = 0.6 for a constant thickness rotor.
Aluminium is unsuited as the structural material for the
wheel (unless as a matrix for a composite with boron or
aluminium carbide additives). Steel is typical with a speciﬁc energy of 30 Wh/kg which increases to 40 Wh/kg for
titanium but glass offers a high speciﬁc energy of
∼100 Wh/kg – the latter is comparable to the lower end of
Li-ion battery speciﬁc power (ignoring depth of discharge). Given that the central hub around the shaft is
usually metal, a metal thin rim rotor eliminates issues with
bonding metal/composite. Composites offer up to 5 times
the energy density of metals despite their more complex
anisotropic failure mechanisms which involve delamination. To minimise radial stresses, the rim may be
constructed from high strength concentric hoops separated
by elastic material – in this case, steel or titanium sandwiching a silicone elastomer. For composite materials,
a spiral ply for carbon ﬁbre layout provides maximum
stress/strain capacity offering tangential tip speeds of
∼1 km/s. The tendency to delamination in composites
forces narrow diameters. The brittleness of magnetic
materials such as NdFeB or AlNiCo to hoop stresses
suggests the use of magnetic composites with iron powder
in a plastic matrix – our rotor assembly is constructed from
50% magnetic iron ﬁlings embedded in 50% PLA matrix
by weight (Figure 2). We have demonstrated 3D printing
of DC motors (except wire coils) as the ﬁrst step towards
Halbach motors as the basis of electromechanical batteries
(ﬂywheels).
Electromechanical batteries can be constructed from
lunar-sourced materials – cobalt-ferrite or alnico magnets
from nickel–iron meteorites, aluminium wiring from anorthite, silicon steel/ferrite/silica electromagnets from ilmenite and aluminium/ceramic structure from anorthite and
other silicates. The commonest failure mode is separation of
the rim from the spokes. To prevent explosive fragmentation, ﬂywheels should be encapsulated in an armoured
containment vessel of steel and/or Sorel cement (derivable
from lunar resources and Earth-supplied Cl) and buried.
Flywheels are accelerated and driven by electric motors
to high speed to store energy and this mechanical energy is
drawn to generate electrical energy. The motor output
torque is given by Iðdw=dtÞ ¼ 1=wðdE=dtÞ. If the ﬂywheel is mounted into gimbals, the gyroscopic moment is
given by M ¼ 2EV
w where E = ﬂywheel kinetic energy, V =
rotor angular velocity of gimbals and w=angular velocity of ﬂywheel rotation. Hence, faster gimbal angle
rates increase the angular moment of a control moment

Ellery

15

Figure 2. (a) 3D printed DC motor with wound coils; (b) compact version of 3D printed motor (with wound coils) versus off-theshelf motor.

gyroscope. In a Halbach motor, there are no iron laminations offering a high speed with low rotor inertia. The
Halbach array is an array of permanent magnets residing in
the rotor which act to reinforce the magnetic ﬁeld on one
side of the array while nullifying it on the other side.109 A
dipole array is formed by the motor’s stator. The Halbach
array of rotating permanent magnets with the ﬂywheel
eliminates iron losses by interacting with the stationary coils.
This Halbach conﬁguration of pole pieces with inner and
outer radii ri and ro can be used in brushless AC motors in
that they generate magnetic ﬁelds in the motor interior. The
permanent magnet segments form a cylindrical shell about
the rotation axis to create an internal dipole. They are selfshielding with negligible ﬁeld outside the motor. Within the
shell the dipole creates a uniform B-ﬁeld110

B ¼ Brem log

rout
rin



sinð2π=pÞ
2π=p

(16)

where Brem = remanent ﬂux of permanent magnets and p =
number of poles. For 16 poles, the sine term in brackets
yields 0.97. Two poles are recommended to prevent imbalance in multipolar rotors. The magnetic ﬁeld is highly
uniform so the air gap size is not a factor making the Halbach
motor volumetrically efﬁcient. High internal ﬁelds of up to
5 T are possible using Halbach arrays of soft pole pieces. The
rotor comprises a simple winding inserted down the axis of
the dipole ﬁeld. AC in the windings at an appropriate frequency generates relative motion of the rotor with respect to
the stator ﬁeld. The EMF generated is given by
V ðtÞ ¼ knB sinðwtÞ

(17)

where n = number of rotor windings and K = geometric
constant →1. This yields a torque τ that is proportional to

the length of conductor l, radius r from the rotational axis
and current i
τ ¼ 2nKBilr

(18)

Because this system is ironless, there are no eddy
current losses. There are no back-induction effects making
the ‘air’ rotor more efﬁcient. The lack of iron core makes
the Halbach motor lightweight. The power output is given
by
!
p2
1
P¼
(19)


Ri 1 þ ðRo =Ri Þ2 þ ðwl=Rl Þ2
The Halbach motor may be operated as a DC or AC
motor depending on its commutation mechanism. A
variation on the Halbach motor is the power ring conﬁguration which spins about the vertical axis and exploits
shear force levitation.111 Windage losses due to air resistance are proportional to the cube of the velocity and
tend to dominate over copper and iron losses in rapidly
spinning rotors but vacuum conditions eliminate this – on
the Moon, the vacuum is ambient. The rotor wheel is
suspended on magnetic bearings within a vacuum chamber
to minimise friction. On the Moon, the magnetic bearings
are required to suspend less weight than on Earth. Flywheels
are capable of rapid charge and discharge with high efﬁciency ∼95%. Double-fed induction motors have been
proposed as ﬂywheel actuators.112 Our self-assembling
panels were based on double-fed rotor and stator coils.113
Flywheels are highly suited to energy storage in vehicles.114 A counter-rotating wheel is typically employed
prevent gyroscopic reaction torques during direction
changes. For example, in spacecraft, energy storage may
be combined with attitude control systems – integrated

16
power and attitude control systems – through two counterrotating wheels per axis: the rotor speed is typically much
higher for power storage than required for attitude control
(<10,000 r/min).115 NASA’s G2 ﬂywheel is constructed
from a titanium hub with a carbon ﬁbre rim spinning at 60,
000 r/min on magnetic bearings with a storage capacity of
525 Wh and motor power charge/discharge rate of 1 kW.116
Its motor is a two-pole permanent magnet synchronous
motor mounted in the hub with position/angle sensors for
feedback. The 100 kg modular assembly is 50 cm diameter
by 100 cm axial length. Much higher ratings are feasible
with larger ﬂywheels ∼1.5 m length by ∼1 m diameter with
∼ MJ capacities and ∼GW charge/discharge rates.117

Conclusion
In considering the most appropriate form of energy
generation and storage that can leveraged from lunar
resources, we propose that solar concentrator/thermionic
converters and ﬂywheels, respectively, can be constructed
from lunar materials whilst offering high performance.
There is little doubt that using local resources to supply
power would be boon for lunar colonisation. There are
further implications – if we can leverage lunar resources to
create energy generation through thermionic vacuum
tubes and storage through electric motors, we can also
create entire kinematic machines from 3D printed motors,
electronics and structural members derived from the same
components. Kinematic machines include roving vehicles
and mining mechanisms to extract the materials bootstrap
our lunar infrastructure. From linear motors, we can create
electromagnetic launchers to launch from the lunar surface
using renewable electrical energy rather than ﬁnite water
resources as propellant/oxidiser. From a few critical
components – motor and vacuum tube – we can assemble
a vast array of capabilities. We have, in effect, a universal
constructor machine ﬁrst envisaged by John von Neumann
who had the insight to realise that it was the key to any
practical self-replication capability. This is in effect a 3D
printer which can print its own parts including its motors
and control electronics (which can be employed for other
machines). These key components for our energy infrastructure serve as a leitmotif for the construction of
other aspects of a basic lunar infrastructure. We believe
that this is the only cost-effective means for robust space
exploration by exploiting the locally available resources.
Declaration of conﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

ORCID iD
Alex Ellery  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8120-7710

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)
Supplementray material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.

References
1. Tartaj P, Morales MP, Gonzalez-Carreño T, et al. The iron
oxides strike back: from biomedical applications to energy
storage devices and photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Adv Mater 2011; 23: 5243–5249. DOI: 10.1002/adma.
201101368.
2. Stoica A. Solar power infrastructure around shackleton
crater. In: Lunar ISRU workshop - developing a new space
economy, Columbia, MD, 15–17 July 2019, 2019. abstract
no 5096.
3. McNab IR. Launch to space with an electromagnetic
railgun. IEEE Trans Magn 2003; 39(1): 295–304.
4. Ellery A. Sustainable in-situ resource utilization on the
moon. Planetary and Space Science 2020; 184: 104870.
5. Ellery A. Solar power satellites for clean energy enabled
through disruptive technologies. In: Proceeding 23rd world
energy congress (Award Winning Papers), Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 October, 2016, pp. 133–147.
6. Criswell D and Waldron R. Lunar system to supply solar
electric power to Earth. In:Proceeding 25th intersociety energy conversion engineering conference, Reno, NV,
12–17 August 1990, 1990, pp. 61–71.
7. Criswell D. Solar power via the moon. Ind Phys 2002; 8(2):
12–15.
8. Ellery A. Geophysiological treatment of an ailing Earth
from space: self-replication technology is essential. Int J
Clim Change Impacts Responses 2018; 10(3): 25–40.
9. Taylor GJ and Martel LMV. Lunar prospecting. Advances
inSpace Research 2003; 31(11): 2403–2412.
10. Criswell D and Curreri P. Photovoltaics using in-situ resource utilization for HEDS. In: Proceeding 6th ASCE
specialty conference on engineering construction and operations in space, Albuquerque, NM, 26–30 April 1998,
1998. paper 40339(206)34.
11. Ignatiev A. Advanced thin-ﬁlm materials processing in the
ultra-vacuum of space. Acta Astronautica 2001; 48(2–3):
115–120.
12. Blakers A, Zin N, McIntosh KR, et al. High efﬁciency
silicon solar cells. Energy Procedia 2013; 33: 1–10.
13. Freundlich A, Ignatiev A, Horton C, et al. Manufacture of
solar cells on the Moon. In: Proceeding 31st IEEE photovoltaic specialists conference, Lake Buena Vista, FL, 3–7
January 2005, 2005, pp. 794–797.
14. Horton C, Gramajo C, Alemu A, et al. First demonstration
of photovoltaic diodes on lunar regolith-based substrate.
Acta Astronaut 2005; 56: 537–545.
15. Chopra KL, Paulson PD and Dutta V. Thin-ﬁlm solar cells:
an overview. Prog Photovolt 2004; 12: 69–92.
16. Ellery A, Lowing P, Wanjara P, et al. FFC Cambridge
process and metallic 3D printing for deep in-situ resource
utilisation – a match made on the Moon. In: Proceeding
international astronautics congress, Adelaide, Australia,
25–29 September, 2017. IAC-17-D4.5.4x39364
17. Ellery A, Lowing P, Wanjara P, et al. FFC Cambridge
process and metallic 3D printing for deep in-situ resource
utilization – a match made on the Moon. In: Proceeding
international astronautics congress, Adelaide, Australia,
25–29 September, 2017. IAC-17-D.4.5.4x39364
18. Oishi T, Watanabe M, Koyama K, et al. Process for solar
grade silicon production by Molten Salt electrolysis using

Ellery
aluminum-silicon liquid alloy. J Electrochem Soc 2011;
158(9): E93–E99.
19. Landis G. Lunar production of space photovoltaic arrays.
In: Proceeding 20th IEEE photovoltaic specialists conference, Las Vegas, NV, 26–30 September 1988, 1988,
pp. 874–879.
20. Xakalashe B and Tangstad M. Silicon processing: from
quartz to crystalline silicon solar cells. In: Jones R and den
Hoed P (eds) South African Pyrometallurgy. Johannesburg:
South African Institute of Mining & Metallurgy; 2011.
21. Sparks D. Fabrication of large photovoltaic arrays in space
from lunar materials. Space Power 1988; 7(3/4): 235–246.
22. Livshits P, Dikhtyar V, Inberg A, et al. Local doping of
silicon by a point-contact microwave applicator. Microelectronic Eng 2011; 88: 2831–2836.
23. Kim R, Cho H, Han K, et al. Optimization of acid leaching
of rare-earth elements from Mongolian apatite-based ore.
Minerals 2016; 6(3): 63.
24. Zhang YJ, Ideue T, Onga M, et al. Enhanced intrinsic
photovoltaic effect in tungsten disulﬁde nanotubes. Nature
2019; 570: 349–353.
25. Chen X and Mao SS. Titanium dioxide nanomaterials:
synthesis, properties, modiﬁcations, and applications.
Chem Rev 2007; 107: 2891–2959.
26. Krebs FC. Fabrication and processing of polymer solar
cells: a review of printing and coating techniques. Solar
Energy Mater Solar Cells 2009; 93: 394–412.
27. Duke MB, Ignatiev A, Freundlich A, et al. Silicon PV cell
production on the moon. J Aerosp Eng 2001; 14(2): 77–83.
28. Girish T and Aranya S. Photovoltaic power generation on
the moon: problems and prospects. In: Badescu V (ed)
Moon. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Publishers, 2012.
29. Wadia C, Alivisatos AP and Kammen DM. Materials
availability expands the opportunity for large-scale photovoltaics deployment. Environ Sci Technol 2009; 43:
2072–2077.
30. Alteratt P, Kiesewetter T, Ellmer K, et al. Specifying targets
of future research in photovoltaic devices containing pyrite
(FeS2) by numerical modelling. Solar Energy Mater Solar
Cells 2002; 71: 181–195.
31. Delbos S. Kësterite thin ﬁlms for photovoltaics: a review.
EPJ Photovolt 2012; 3: 35004.
32. Siebentritt S. Why are kesterite solar cells not 20% efﬁcient? Thin Solid Films 2013; 535: 1–4.
33. Nguyen T. Super silicon bros. New Sci 2015; 228: 39–41.
34. Ornes S. Perovskites’ solar promise. Physics World 2015;
28(5): 30–34.
35. Torimrubun A, Austy C, Maulana E, et al. Affordable and
sustainable new generation of solar cells: calcium titanate
(CaTiO3)-based perovskite solar cells. E3S Web of Conferences 2018; 67: 01010.
36. Extance A. The reality behind solar power’s next star
material. Nature 2019; 570: 429–432.
37. Kathirvel K, Rajasekar R, Kumar R, et al. Effect of calcium
titanium oxide coating on the power generation of solar
cells. Int J Sci Eng Res 2016; 7(4): 127–130.
38. Schaller R and Klimov V. High efﬁciency carrier multiplication in PbSe nanocrystals: implications for solar energy conversion. Phys Rev Lett 2004; 92(18): 186601.
39. Pucker G, Serra E and Jestin Y. Silicon quantum dots for
photovoltaics: a review. In: Al-Ahmadi A (ed) Quantum
Dots – a Variety of New Applications. Rijeka, Croatia:
InTechOpen, 2012, pp. 59–92.

17
40. Bradhorst H and Rodiek J. Space solar array reliability:
a study and recommendations. Acta Astronautica 2008; 63:
1233–1238.
41. Ellery A, Kreisel J and Sommer B. Case for robotic on-orbit
servicing of spacecraft: spacecraft reliability is a myth. Acta
Astronaut 2008; 63(5–6): 632–648.
42. Tafazoli M. A study of on-orbit spacecraft failures. Acta
Astronaut 2009; 64: 195–205.
43. Khamooshi M, Salati H, Egelioglu F, et al. Review of solar
photovoltaic concentrators. Int J Photoenergy 2014:
958521.
44. Rech D. Construction manual for the Mirror-O-Matic.
www.mirror-o-matic.com, 2002.
45. Antonini A, Stefancich M, Coventry J, et al. Modelling of
compound parabolic concentrators for photovoltaic applications. Int J Opt Appl 2013; 3(4): 40–52.
46. Lansing FL and Dorman J. High-efﬁciency solar concentrator. Proc Int Symp Workshop onSolar Energy 1980;
1: 392–403.
47. Davis A and Kühnlenz F. Optical design using Fresnel
lenses: basic principles and some practical examples. Optik
& Photonik 2007; 2(4): 52–55.
48. Madhugiri G and Karale S. High solar energy concentration with a Fresnel lens: a review. Int J Modern Engineering Research 2012; 2(3): 1381–1385.
49. Kritchman EM, Friesem AA and Yekutieli G. Efﬁcient
Fresnel lens for solar concentration. Solar Energy 1979; 22:
119–123.
50. Chiromawa N and Ibrahim K. Concept of bee-eyes array of
Fresnel lenses as a solar photovoltaic concentrator system.
J Photon 2015: 327342.
51. Ning X, O’Gallagher J and Winston R. Optics of two-stage
photovoltaic concentrators with dielectric second stages.
Appl Opt 1987; 26(7): 1207–1212.
52. O’Gallagher J and Winston R. Performance model for twostage optical concentrators for solar thermal applications.
Solar Energy 1988; 41(4): 319–325.
53. Dixit S, Hyde R, Weisberg A, et al. Development of largeaperture, lightweight Fresnel lenses for gossamer space
telescopes. In: Proceeding 3rd AIAA gossamer spacecraft
forum, Denver, Colorado, 22–25 April 2002, 2002. UCRLJC-148223.
54. Smestad G, Ries H, Winston R, et al. The thermodynamic
limits of light concentrators. Solar Energy Mater 1990; 21:
99–111.
55. Rabl A. Comparison of solar concentrators. Solar Energy
1976; 18: 93–111.
56. Davis A. Fresnel lens solar concentrator derivations and
simulations. In: Koshel J and Gregory G (eds) Novel
Optical Systems Design & Optimisation XIV. Belligham,
Washington, 2011. Proc SPIE 8129, 12.891818.
57. Amy C, Budenstein D, Bagepalli M, et al. Pumping liquid
metal at high temperatures up to 1,673 Kelvin. Nature
2017; 550: 199–203.
58. Herranz G and Rodriguez G. Uses of concentrated solar
energy in materials science. In: Rugescu R (ed) Solar
Energy. Rijeka, Croatia: IntechOpen, 2010, pp. 145–170.
59. Kayser M. Solar sinterer project, https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=ptUj8JRAYu8, 2011.
60. Wang XH, Fuh JYH, Wong YS, et al. Laser sintering of
silica sand ? Mechanism and application to sand casting
mould. International Journal Advanced Manufacturing
Technology 2003; 21: 1015–1020.

18
61. Nakaruma T and Senior C. Solar thermal power for lunar
materials processing. J Aerospace Engineering 2008;
21(2): 91–101.
62. Nakaruma T. Optical Waveguide System for Solar Power
Applications in Space. In: Proceeding SPIE Optical Engineering & Applications 7423: Non-Imaging Optics –
Efﬁcient Design for Illumination & Solar Concentration IV,
San Diego, CA, 20 August 2009, 2009. 12.826255.
63. Nakamura T and Smith B. Solar thermal power system for
lunar ISRU applications: result of ISRU analogue test,
Mauna Kea HI. In: Proceeding AIAA space conference &
exposition, Anaheim, CA, 30 August–2 September 2010,
2010. AIAA 2010-0902.
64. Furfaro R and Gellenbeck S. Fresnel-based solar concentration power system for mars and lunar outposts. In: Proceeding
44th international conference environmental systems, Tucson,
AZ, 13–17 July 2014, 2014. ICES-2014-106.
65. Saade E, Clough DE and Weimer AW. Model predictive
control of a solar-thermal reactor. Solar Energy 2014; 102:
31–44.
66. MacFarlane DL, Narayan V, Tatum JA, et al. Microjet
fabrication of microlens arrays. IEEE Photon Technol Lett
1994; 6(9): 1112–1114.
67. Bardinal V, Daran E, Leı̈chlé T, et al. Fabrication and
characterization of microlens arrays using a cantileverbased spotter. Opt Express 2007; 15(11): 6900–6907.
68. Sierra C and Vázquez AJ. High solar energy concentration
with a Fresnel lens. J Mater Sci 2005; 40: 1339–1343.
69. Kamada O. Theoretical concentration and attainable temperatures in solar furnaces. Solar Energy 1964; 9(1): 39–47.
70. Sakai A, Minami S, Koretsune T, et al. Iron-based binary
ferromagnets for transverse thermoelectric conversion.
Nature 2020; 581: 53–57.
71. Brandhorts H and Chapman P. New 5 kW free-piston
stirling space converter developments. Acta Astronaut
2008; 63: 342–347.
72. Summerer I and Stephenson K. Nuclear power sources:
a key enabling technology for planetary exploration. Proc
Ins Mech Eng G: J Aerosp Eng 2009; 225: 129–143.
73. Fedorov M. Thermoelectric silicides: past, present and
future. J Thermoelectr 2009; 2: 51–60. ISSN 1607-8829.
74. Carter MJ, El-Desouky A, Andre MA, et al. Pulsed laser
melting of bismuth telluride thermoelectric materials. J
Manuf Processes 2019; 43A: 35–46.
75. Boona SR. Nanomagnets boost thermoelectric output.
Nature 2017; 549: 169–170.
76. Stelmakh V, Rinnerbauer V, Chan W, et al. Tantalumtungsten alloy photonic crystals for high temperature energy conversion systems. In: Romanov S, Lozano G,
Gerace D, et al. (eds) Proceeding SPIE 9127, Photonic
Crustal Materials & Devices XI. Bellingham, Washington:
SPIE Press, 2014.
77. Gryaznov G, Zhabotinskii E, Zrodnikov A, et al. Thermoemission reactor-converters for nuclear power units in
outer space. Atomnaya Energiya 1998; 66(6): 374–377.
78. Daglish H. Electron Emission from Cold Magnesium
Oxide. Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1961. paper no
3344E.
79. Orvis WJ, McConaghy CF, Ciarlo DR, et al. Modeling and
fabricating micro-cavity integrated vacuum tubes. IEEE
Trans Electron Devices 1989; 36(11): 2651–2658.
80. Sadwick L, Zhang Y, Schaeffer D, et al. Progress in microminiature thermionic vacuum tube devices. Proc IEEE
Int Electron Devices Meet 1994; 32: 779–782.

Proc IMechE Part G: J Aerospace Engineering 0(0)
81. Halas S. 100 years of work function. Mater Sci Poland
2006; 24(4): 951–967.
82. Go D, Haase J, George J, et al. Thermionic energy conversion in the 21st century: advances and opportunities for
space and terrestrial applications. Front Mech Eng 2017; 3:
13.
83. King D, Zavaldi K, Jennison D, et al. Low work function
material development for the microminiature thermionic
converter. Sandia Report SAND2004-0555. Albuquerque,
NM: Sandia National Laboratories, 2004.
84. Abdul Khalid KA, Leong TJ and Mohamed K. Review on
thermionic energy converters. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 2016; 63(6): 2231–2241.
85. Ryan Smith J. Increasing the efﬁciency of a thermionic
engine using a negative electron afﬁnity collector. J Appl
Phys 2013; 114: 164514.
86. Gyftopoulos E and Hatsopoulos G. Thermionic nuclear
reactors. Electrical Engineering 1963: 108–116.
87. Meir S, Stephanos C, Geballe TH, et al. Highly-efﬁcient
thermoelectronic conversion of solar energy and heat into
electric power. Journal ofRenewable andSustainable Energy 2013; 5: 043127.
88. Espinoza B, Dallakyan T and Dinh P. Laser microfabrication
techniques move rapid prototyping to the mainstream, https://
www.photonics.com/Article.aspx?AID=61735, 2017.
89. Bellucci A, Calvani P, Cappelli E, et al. Preliminary
characterisation of ST2G: solar thermionic-thermoelectric
generator for concentrating systems. In: NanoForum AIP
Conference Proceeding 1667, 21–24 September 2014,
2014.paper 020007.
90. Schwede JW, Bargatin I, Riley DC, et al. Photon-enhanced
thermionic emission for solar concentrator systems. Nat
Mater 2010; 9: 762–767.
91. Kribus A and Segev G. Solar energy conversion with
photon-enhanced thermionic emission. J Opt 2016; 18:
073001.
92. Carver L. From nanoantennas to deep space satellites,
electron emission enables efﬁcient power generation. IEEE
Spectrum 2016; S27–S29.
93. Trucci D, Bellucci A, Cappelli E, et al. Thermionic
emission: a different path to solar thermal electricity. In:
Proceeding SolarPaces, Marrakesh, Morocco, 1–14 September 2012, 2012.
94. Segev G, Rosenwaks Y and Kribus A. Limit of efﬁciency
for photon-enhanced thermionic emission vs. photovoltaic
and thermal conversion. Solar Energy Mater Solar Cells
2015; 140: 464–476.
95. Todoriv T, Singh S, Bishop D, et al. Ultrathin high band
gap solar cells with improved efﬁciencies from the world’s
oldest photovoltaic material. Nat Commun 2017; 8: 682.
96. Shinde SS, Bansode RA, Bhosale CH, et al. Physical
properties of hematite α-Fe2O3thin ﬁlms: application to
photoelectrochemical solar cells. J Semicond 2011; 32(1):
013001. DOI: 10.1088/1674-4926/32/1/013001.
97. Climent B, Torroba O, González-Cinca R, et al. Heat
storage and electricity generation in the Moon during the
lunar night. Acta Astronaut 2014; 93: 352–358.
98. Pearson C, Thwaite C and Russel N. Small cell lithium-ion
batteries: the responsive solution for space energy storage.In: Proceeding 3rd responsive space conference, 25–28
April 2005, Los Angeles, CA, 2005. RS3-2005-5003.
99. Navarathinam N, Lee R and Chesser H. Characterization of
lithium-polymer batteries for CubeSat applications. Acta
Astronaut 2011; 68: 1752–1760.

Ellery
100. Tsai KJ, Kuchynka DJ and Sammells AF. The electrochemical generation of useful chemical species from lunar
materials. J Power Sourc 1990; 29: 321–332.
101. Dietzler D and Schubert P. Electrical energy storage using
only lunar materials”. In: Space manufacturing 14: critical
technologies for space settlement, Mountain View, CA,
29–31 October 2010, 2010.
102. Lee J and Kim T. Micro space power system using MEMS
fuel cell for nano-satellites. Acta Astronaut 2014; 101:
165–169.
103. Shimizu T and Underwood C. Super-capacitor energy
storage for micro-satellites: feasibility and potential mission applications. Acta Astronaut 2013; 85: 138–154.
104. Xiang Y, Lu S and Jiang SP. Layer-by-layer self-assembly
in the development of electrochemical energy conversion
and storage devices from fuel cells to supercapacitors.
Chem Soc Rev 2012; 41: 7291–7321.
105. Malone E, Rasa K, Cohen D, et al. Freeform fabrication of
zinc-air batteries and electromechanical assemblies. Rapid
Prototyping J 2004; 10(1): 58–69.
106. Kirk JA. Flywheel energy storage I: basic concepts. International Journal ofMechanical Sciences 1977; 19:
223–231.
107. Hadjipaschalis I, Poullikkas A and Efthimiou V. Overview
of current and future energy storage technologies for
electric power applications. Renewable andSustainable
Energy Reviews 2009; 13: 1513–1522.
108. Vazquez S, Lukic SM, Galvan E, et al. Energy storage
systems for transport and grid applications. IEEE Trans Ind
Electron 2010; 57(12): 3881–3895.

19
109. Abdi B, Milimonfared J and Moghani J. Simpliﬁed design, optimization and comparative study of SPM, BLDC
and halbach machines for microsatellite electro-mechanical
batteries. IEEE Trans Aerosp Electron Syst 2015; 51(1):
31–39.
110. Bolund B, Bernhoff H and Leijon M. Flywheel energy and
power storage systems. Renewable andSustainable Energy
Reviews 2007; 11: 235–258.
111. Fiske O and Ricci M. Third generation ﬂywheels for high
power electricity storage. In: Proceeding 19th international
conference magnetically levitated systems & linear drives,
Dresden, Germany, 13–15 September, 2006.
112. Akagi H and Sato H. Control and performance of a doublyfed induction machine intended for a ﬂywheel energy storage
system. IEEE Trans Power Electron 2002; 17(1): 109–116.
113. Ellery A and Elaskri A. Steps towards self-assembly of
lunar structures from modules of 3D printed in-situ resources. In: International Astronautics Congress, Washington DC, IAC, 2019. IAC 19, D4.1.4.x49787.
114. Hedlund M, Lundin J, de Santiago J, et al. Flywheel energy
storage for automotive applications. Energies 2015; 8:
10636–10663.
115. Babuuska V, Beatty S, deBlonk B, et al. Review of
technology developments in ﬂywheel attitude control and
energy transmission systems. IEEE Aerospace Conf Proc
2004: 2784–2800.
116. Jansen R and Dever T. G2 ﬂywheel module design. NASA
CR-2006-213862, 2006.
117. Hebner R, Beno J and Walls A. Flywheel batteries come
around again. IEEE Spectrum 2002: 46–51.

