Robotica
http://journals.cambridge.org/ROB
Additional services for Robotica:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here

RepRap – the replicating rapid prototyper
Rhys Jones, Patrick Haufe, Edward Sells, Pejman Iravani, Vik Olliver, Chris Palmer and Adrian Bowyer
Robotica / Volume 29 / Special Issue 01 / January 2011, pp 177 - 191
DOI: 10.1017/S026357471000069X, Published online: 14 January 2011

Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S026357471000069X
How to cite this article:
Rhys Jones, Patrick Haufe, Edward Sells, Pejman Iravani, Vik Olliver, Chris Palmer and Adrian Bowyer (2011). RepRap –
the replicating rapid prototyper. Robotica, 29, pp 177-191 doi:10.1017/S026357471000069X
Request Permissions : Click here

Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/ROB, IP address: 193.140.240.110 on 13 Nov 2014

Robotica (2011) volume 29, pp. 177–191. © Cambridge University Press 2011
doi:10.1017/S026357471000069X

RepRap – the replicating rapid prototyper
Rhys Jones†, Patrick Haufe‡, Edward Sells§, Pejman Iravani†,
Vik Olliver¶, Chris Palmer and Adrian Bowyer†,∗
†Department of Mechanical Engineering, Bath University, Bath BA2 7AY, UK
‡Faculty 5, Department of Biomimetics/Biological Materials, Hochschule Bremen, University of Applied Sciences,
Neustadtswall 30, D-28199 Bremen, Germany
§Bits From Bytes Ltd., Unit 17 Hither Green Industrial Estate, Clevedon, North Somerset BS21 6XU, UK
¶Diamond Age Solutions Ltd., 72 Warner Park Avenue, Laingholm, Waitakere, New Zealand
Boatmans Row, Astley Green, Tyldesley, Manchester M29 7JQ, UK
(Received in Final Form: October 27, 2010)

SUMMARY
This paper presents the results to date of the RepRap project –
an ongoing project that has made and distributed freely
a replicating rapid prototyper. We give the background
reasoning that led to the invention of the machine, the
selection of the processes that we and others have used
to implement it, the designs of key parts of the machine
and how these have evolved from their initial concepts and
experiments, and estimates of the machine’s reproductive
success out in the world up to the time of writing (about
4500 machines in two and a half years).
KEYWORDS: Self-replicating machine; Rapid prototyping;
Additive fabrication; Biomimetics; Mutualism; Opensource; Free software; Fused-filament fabrication.

1. Introduction
RepRap is an open-source self-replicating rapid prototyping
machine. It is a robot that uses the fused-filament
fabrication∗∗ to make engineering components and other
products from a variety of thermoplastic polymers. RepRap
has been designed to be able to print out a significant
fraction of its own parts automatically. All its remaining parts
have been selected to be standard engineering materials and
components available cheaply worldwide. As the machine
is free†† and open-source, anyone may – without royalty
payments – make any number of copies of it ether for
themselves or for others, using the RepRap machines
themselves to reproduce those copies.
In this paper, we briefly examine the terminology and
history of artificial reproduction, and then describe the
biomimetic genesis of the RepRap machine, its original
* Corresponding author. E-mail: A.Bowyer@bath.ac.uk
Fused-filament Fabrication (FFF) is sometimes called Fused
Deposition Modelling (FDM). But this latter phrase is trademarked
by Stratasys Inc., and so is not in unconstrained use. FFF was coined
by the members of the RepRap project to give a synonymous term
that could be used by all unrestrictedly.
††
In this paper, we always use the word “free” to convey both the
meanings that it has in the free software discourse: “Free as in
freedom”, and “Free as in beer”.
∗∗

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

design, how and why that design has changed into its current
form, RepRap’s global adoption and use, and the commercial
offshoots and spinouts from it.

1.1. Terminology
Historically, the terminology used in the field of selfreproducing machines has sometimes been unclear, with
different meanings being ascribed to the same terms. In an
attempt to bring some systematisation to this, we will define
key terms for use in this paper at least.
Kinematic machine: A physical machine that is composed
of fixed and moveable parts. This term makes a distinction
between real machines and software models (which are
frequently used for simulation). In what follows, we take
the words “kinematic machine” to include living organisms.
Self-replication: We start with the idea that self-replication
could mean an imaginary Platonic process by which a
kinematic machine was able to create an exact copy of
itself. The Second Law of Thermodynamics and Shannon’s
theorem1 show that information cannot be copied without
loss or error indefinitely, implying that the idea of an exact
replicator is impossibile. (Of course, it is the errors that
drive Darwinian evolution.) Whilst it is philosophically and
poetically useful to have words for impossible ideas, here we
reduce the strength of the word “replication” to give it an
engineering meaning: a copy within specified tolerances that
will work as well as the original.
Self-reproduction: A process by which a kinematic
machine is able to create an approximate copy of
itself, perhaps with either insignificant or significant
errors. All living organisms are self-reproducers. The
specified-tolerances and works-as-well distinctions between
replication and reproduction follows through the definitions
below, and the rest of this paper. Replicators are a subset of
reproducers.
Self-manufacturing: The ability of a kinematic machine to
make some or all of its own parts from raw materials. This
clearly prompts a requirement for a definition of “raw”: Is
an etched printed circuit board a raw material? Or a uniform
copper-clad board? Or some copper, some glass, and some
epoxy resin? Forensically, many Gordian knots of this sort

IP address: 193.140.240.110

178

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

Fig. 1. Schematic of von Neumann’s kinematic reproducer from ref. [4].

are cut by asking, “Would a reasonable person say it is so?”
and leaving it at that. We adopt the same approach as the law.
Self-assembly: This refers to the ability of a kinematic
machine to manipulate a series of parts into an assembled
copy of itself.
Autotrophic self-reproduction or self-replication: The
ability of a system to make a direct copy of itself from
raw materials without assistance. As yet, no artificial
autotrophic self-reproducing kinematic machine has been
made. However, examples exist in biology (see Section 2).
For a kinematic machine to achieve autotrophic selfreproduction, it must contain a number of critical subsystems.
One attempt to identify these subsystems was undertaken
in Freitas and Merkle’s “Map of the Kinematic Replicator
Design Space” in their comprehensive book,2 which
identified 137 design properties in order for autotrophic selfreproduction to be possible.
Assisted self-reproduction or self-replication: A kinematic
machine that includes at least one but not all of the critical
subsystems required for autotrophic self-reproduction or
replication and so needs human (or other) intervention to
reproduce.
By these definitions, RepRap is a kinematic assisted selfreplicating and self-manufacturing machine, as we shall show
below.
1.2. Artificial reproduction
The concept of self-reproducing kinematic machines has
intrigued some of the world’s greatest minds for generations.
However, the first person to formalise thoughts on the
subject was von Neumann in the middle of the last century.3
Much of von Neumann’s work concentrated on his cellular
machine, a theoretical and mathematical model, and records
of his research into a kinematic (physical) self-reproducing
machine are scarce and often informal. Much of the outline
presented here is based on the summary in the review by
Freitas and Merkle.2
Von Neumann’s kinematic reproducer, as illustrated by
Cairns-Smith4 in Fig. 1, consists of five distinct components,
namely a chassis (c), a set of instructions (I), some form of
machinery (m), a controller (r) and, finally, a sequencer (s).
In order for the kinematic reproducer to function properly,
it is required that it resides in a stockroom containing an

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

unlimited quantity of spare parts. The kinematic machine
features a mechanical appendage that is able to gather parts
at random from this stockroom; the randomly selected part
is inspected and compared with the kinematic machine’s
instructions. In the event that the part is not required, it is
replaced in the stock room and the process is repeated until a
required part is found. This process is then repeated to find the
next required part, and the two parts are connected together
using the mechanical appendage. This cycle continues until
a physical copy of the kinematic machine is produced; at
which point, the instructions are copied in to the memory in
the child kinematic machine before it is finally activated.
In devising his kinematic reproducer, von Neumann
ignored any fuel and energy requirements. Even so, with a
part-count of the chassis estimated at 32,000, the feasibility
of the device was poor. Nevertheless, the concept did at
least demonstrate the principle of a self-reproducer, and has
inspired many people to do further research. Most of this
work may be broken down into three distinct subsets. Using
the above-given definitions, these subsets are as follows:
1.2.1. Autotrophic self-reproducers. With limited success so
far in the areas of self-assembly and self-manufacturing, an
artificial autotrophic self-reproducer remains an unachieved
utopia for the subject. Whilst theoretical work has been
undertaken in the area, all the concepts presented so far
are extremely vague on the engineering involved in artificial
reproduction, being described by Dyson thus: “We don’t have
the science yet; we don’t have the technology”.5
1.2.2. Self-assembling kinematic machines. Some of the
most elegant work into self-assembling kinematic machines
using special pre-made parts was conducted by Roger
and Lionel Penrose in designing their so-called block
reproducers.6 Perhaps the biggest achievements of their
design are its neatness and simplicity.
The block reproducer (Fig. 2) consists of a series of
wooden blocks that are placed on an agitating surface. The
design of the blocks is such that an interlocking profile exists
on each block. “Brownian-motion” is induced into the
parts by agitating the surface, enabling the locking profile
to be utilised for completing the assembly process. The

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

179

Fig. 2. A 1-D self-reproducing kinematic machine made from parts of two kinds from ref. [6].

Penroses also designed a more complicated two-dimensional
reproducing kinematic machine along similar lines.
Further work into self-assembling processes was
conducted by Moses,7 who developed a self-assembling
kinematic machine in the form of a Cartesian manipulator
based on 16 types of snap-fit parts. Similarly to von
Neumann’s kinematic reproducer, it was able to build a
copy of itself if supplied with sufficient parts. However,
whilst the concept proved promising, the structure of the
design lacked stiffness, leading the machine to need external
assistance to complete its reproduction cycle. But, inspired
by this success, the world’s first semi-autonomous, limitedpart, self-assembling kinematic machine was created in 2003
by Suthakorn et al.,8 with an assembly time of just 135 s. It
consisted of an original robot, subsystems of three assembly
stations and a set of subsystems from which replicas of the
original robot were assembled. In 2005, Zykov et al.9 made a
system consisting of cubes split along a diagonal where each
half-cube could rotate relative to the other in that split plane.
The cube’s faces were fitted with electromagnets. Stacks and
other arrangements of these could be made to reproduce
themselves if fed with a supply of similar active cubes, with
the stack acting as a robot arm when the split faces were
rotated.
1.2.3. Self-manufacturing kinematic machines. To date, the
amount of work on self-manufacturing process has been
limited. The main research in this area was conducted in
1980–1982 by the Replicating Systems Concepts Team at
NASA.10 They discussed the following two fundamental
models for a self-manufacturing process:
1. The unit growth or factory model consists of a
series of sub-assemblies, which collectively are able to
manufacture and tassemble all sub-assemblies within the
model until the surrounding resources are exhausted. As
the name suggests, and as observed by von Neumann,
any machine shop with sufficient equipment may be
considered a self-manufacturing unit growth system.
2. Unlike the unit growth model, the unit replication∗ model
specifies that one device must be able to manufacture
all of its own parts. Perhaps the most interesting facet
of this model is that it potentially has the ability to be
substantially more compact than the unit growth model,
to the degree that such a kinematic machine could exist
∗

We shall call this the unit reproduction model from here on, in
accordance with our defined terminology.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

in every home. As yet, the autotrophic unit reproduction
model has not been realised. One possible reason for this
is that traditional manufacturing methods require tools to
have one specific function (such as a lathe for cutting about
an axis) severely limiting the potential designs that can be
manufactured with a single kinematic machine. Therefore,
the goal of achieving a self-manufacturing process based
on the unit reproduction model cannot be realised until an
extremely versatile manufacturing technology is realised.

2. The Genesis of RepRap
Sometimes the progress and the reporting of a project can
obscure the train of thought that instigated the project.
Typically, that train of thought was incomplete, or sometimes
downright wrong. In this section, we attempt to set down as
a matter of record the ideas that led one of us (Bowyer) to
invent RepRap.
Understandably, the design of most practical artificial
reproducers starts with proposed solutions to many technical
problems of getting a kinematic machine copy itself.
However, RepRap was not instigated in that way at all.
RepRap was instigated by biomimetically considering extant
naturally evolved strategies for reproduction.
Biologists categorise most bacteria, archaea, protists and
plants as autotrophic because they are capable of selfnourishment using inorganic materials as a source of
nutrients and using photosynthesis or chemosynthesis as a
source of energy. However, almost without exception, all
the natural species of reproducers in the world (including
those in the previous sentence) depend upon other species
in some way for their survival and successful breeding
– by this light they are all assisted self-reproducers. A
few lithophile micro-organisms can survive alone in what
are essentially mineral environments, but their numbers
are vanishingly insignificant compared with those of the
interdependent species. Clearly, primordial organisms must
have been completely autotrophic, but now that way of
life has all but disappeared because the environment in
which modern organisms have evolved consists, to a first
approximation, entirely of other reproducers.
Yet research into artificial reproduction often concentrates
upon making the reproducer as autotrophic as possible (like
the lithophiles), and researchers regard this as an important
aim. Clearly this aim is important for an extraterrestrial
reproducer, but why so for a terrestrial one? Why try to
follow a strategy that biology has all but abandoned? An

IP address: 193.140.240.110

180

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

artificial reproducer designed to be interdependent with the
natural reproducers that will make up its environment would
be more likely to be successful.
Dependencies between species take one of the following
three forms: predation, commensalism, or mutualism.
Predation is well understood: lions eat antelope; antelope
eat grass. Commensalism usually implies some sort of
scavenging – lions and antelope are uninterested (though
not ultimately disinterested) in what the grass does with their
dung, their urine and their exhaled CO2 . Mutualism∗ implies
a symmetry of dependencies giving benefit to both partners:
the pistol shrimp digs a burrow in which it then lives with a
goby fish; the shrimp is nearly blind and the fish warns it of
danger.
This variety of dependencies prompts a choice in the design
of an artificial reproducer: Which type of dependencies
should our artificial reproducer exploit, and with which
natural species? Beneficial options to people might include
predation upon pests, commensal gathering of waste, or
mutualism with a species whose welfare we wished to
promote (such as an endangered or an agricultural one).
However, clearly the most interesting natural species with
which our proposed artificial reproducer might exhibit a
dependency is ourselves. This makes the choice more sharply
cut: it would be foolhardy to make ourselves the prey for our
artificial reproducer; having it collect our waste commensally
might be useful, but the option most pleasing to our evolved
senses of morality and symmetry would be to make ourselves
a reproducing mutualist. In other words, we should make an
artificial reproducer that would benefit from us, and we from
it.
The most famous mutualism in nature, and the one that
we all learn about first at school, is a reward for a service.
Butler11 said of this in Erewhon∗∗ :
Does any one say that the red clover has no reproductive system
because the humble bee (and the humble bee only) must aid and
abet it before it can reproduce? No one. The humble bee is a part
of the reproductive system of the clover.

Moreover, he might have added, the bee is rewarded with
nectar.
Mutualism between the flowers and the insects evolved
about 140 mya in the late Jurassic period and is one of
the most enduring phenomena in biology. For both sets of
species it is an evolutionarily stable strategy corresponding
to a particularly unshakable Nash equilibrium.
What service could our mutualist reproducer ask from us?
Moreover, with what could it reward us?
It would seem sensible to play to the differing strengths of
artificial kinematic machines and people. Artificial kinematic
machines can make objects accurately, repeatably and
tirelessly. In contrast, they fumble at manipulative tasks
that would not tax a small child. People are exquisitely
dexterous. (Aristotle called the human hand, the instrument
of instruments.) But – though with practice people may
∗

Sometimes called symbiosis, but this term (which can mean any
species–pair relationship, including that between predator and prey)
is being replaced by the more precise mutualism for mutually
beneficial relationships.
∗∗
Famously, this novel is also one of the first places in history
wherein appears the idea of an artificial reproducing machine.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

carve and mould beautifully – they cannot do so accurately,
repeatably and tirelessly.
So our self-reproducing kinematic machine could be
designed to manufacture a kit of parts for a copy of itself, and
to need the assistance of people to assemble that copy (that is,
it would be an assisted reproducer along the lines of NASA’s
unit-reproducer10 ). The people would be the humble bee, and
the kinematic machine the clover. And what about the nectar?
If the kinematic machine were sufficiently versatile to make
its own parts, then chances are that it would also be able to
make many other items useful to people. When it was not
reproducing itself, it would be rewarding its assistants with
a supply of consumer goods. This idea of a self-reproducing
machine also making useful things for people is not new. It
goes back through von Neumann to Butler. But we contend
that regarding this as a form of biological mutualism and
deliberately seeking to achieve that in order to position both
reproducers at an evolutionary Nash equilibrium for each is
a novel idea.
This was the genesis of the RepRap machine. It was
designed to make its own parts to be assembled by people
into another RepRap. The people would be driven to do this
by the fact that the machine, when not reproducing, could
make them all manner of useful products. It seemed (and still
seems) likely that this would lead to a mutualist relationship
between people and the machine that would inherit some of
the longevity and the robustness of the evolutionarily stable
strategies of the insects and the flowering plants.
Finally in this section, we note that flowers do not attempt
some biological equivalent of copyrighting or patenting the
“intellectual property” of their genomes. Such a genome
builds the flower with the sole intent† of spreading itself
with the most promiscuous fecundity possible. Any genome
mutation that arose that – for example – attempted to extract
some payment (like the nectar) in return for a copy of itself
would clearly have a lower reproductive fitness. The nectar
and the information are not in any way equivalent. The nectar
is a real material resource. In contrast, the immaterial genome
information has been arranged purely because of its success
in copying itself as freely as it can, and any impediment
placed in the way of that would be to its detriment. For
this reason, it was decided to follow the principles of the
free software movement and to distribute every piece of
information required to build RepRap under a software libre
licence that requires no royalty payments whatsoever. This
would allow private individuals to own the machine, and to
use it freely to make copies for their friends.
The RepRap machine is intended to evolve by artificial
rather than natural selection; that is, to evolve as the Labrador
has evolved from the wolf, rather than as the wolf has evolved
from its ancestors. It is hoped that this evolution will come
about by RepRap users posting design improvements on-line
that may be adopted in future designs of the machine and then
in turn downloaded by old and new users. That is why the
General Public Licence was chosen as the RepRap licence,
as that obliges people who improve the machine to make
public their improvements under a similar free licence.12

†

Of course, no genome has intent. But they all behave as if they do.

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

181

3. The First RepRap Machine
In order for the RepRap project to progress, the rather abstract
reasoning laid out in the sections above had to give way to
some down-to-earth engineering. This occupies the rest of
this paper.
The first engineering decision was to use rapid prototyping∗ as the manufacturing technology for RepRap as
opposed to – say – the CNC milling. The reasons for this
were threefold:
• Rapid prototyping requires very low forces to create
solids, unlike machining.
• Of all the manufacturing technologies, rapid prototyping
is the easiest to control automatically by computer.
• It is the closest current technology to the “maximum
versatility” specified by the 1980s’ NASA report.10
The massive cast bases required by machining centres to
overcome cutting forces and vibration would be a significant
impediment to self-reproduction; this was the basis of the
first reason. It is true that cold-casting of – for example –
concrete might have reduced this impediment to a certain
extent, but that would still leave the fact that cutting
(especially of complicated re-entrant shapes) requires very
sophisticated toolpath-planning algorithms. In contrast, all
rapid prototyping requires algorithmically is the ability to
compute a sequence of planar slices through a geometric
model of the part to be manufactured and to fill each with a
hatch or similar pattern (see the second reason above). These
are straightforward.
At around this stage it was decided (as mentioned in the
Introduction) that any parts that the RepRap machine could
not make for itself had to be cheaply and widely available to
maximise the ease – and hence probability – of reproduction.
Having chosen rapid prototyping, the next decision that
needed to be taken was which of the extant processes to use,
or whether it would be necessary to invent a new one.
This decision was made by elimination: any process
needing a laser was rejected owing to the unlikeliness of
being able to use rapid prototyping to make a laser, and the
fact that they are expensive items. This removed selective
laser sintering and stereolithography from consideration (and
also electron beam melting for very similar reasons, though
that does not actually need a laser).
Similarly, any process needing inkjet print heads was
rejected. Again, it was thought unlikely that the machine
would be able to make these for itself, at least initially.
Though ink-jet heads are relatively cheap, they are
constrained by the fact that their manufacturers have a
business model of discounting the printers that use the heads
and then putting a big mark-up on the heads themselves.
Also, they sometimes put chips in the heads to prevent their
being re-filled, and adopt other restrictive strategies that make
inkjet an unattractive technology for a machine intended to
∗

The term “additive fabrication”, which is now becoming a carryall
for the totality of rapid prototyping and 3D printing technologies,
was less current at the start of the RepRap project (2004).
Then “rapid prototyping” was by far the more popular term.
Its subsequent decline has tracked the change in use of these
technologies from prototyping towards production.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

reproduce as freely as possible. These facts removed ink-jet
printing from consideration.
The project was then left with laminated object
manufacturing and fused-filament fabrication from the extant
technologies. Laminated object manufacturing was attractive
owing to its simplicity and the ubiquity of its working
material: paper. But fused-filament fabrication13 offered the
possibility of being able to build with multiple different
materials. This in turn offered the significant potential
advantage of being able to have the machine make a larger
proportion of its own components than could be created
out of just one material. This, combined with the fact that
it was conjectured that fused-filament fabrication could be
implemented using low-cost garden-shed methods,∗∗ led that
to be chosen for RepRap. Thus, it was not necessary to devise
a new rapid prototyping technology.
Figure 3 shows the first production the RepRap machine.
There were experimental machines made before this to try
out various ideas, but this is the first model used to make
copies of its own rapid prototyped parts. It is a steppingmotor-driven Cartesian robot consisting of an open frame
made from M8 threaded steel rods held together by rapid
prototyped parts and M5 screws. The build base upon which
parts are made is cut from 12-mm medium-density fibreboard
(MDF). Virtually all the parts that the machine cannot make
for itself other than the electronics and the motors can be
obtained from an ordinary high-street hardware shop. The
horizontal x- and y-axes (which need to move comparatively
fast – typically with a feed rate of 3000 mm/min) are driven
directly by toothed timing belts. The z-axis only moves by
a small distance when one layer of production is finished
and the next is about to start; aside from this and the need
to return to its home position at the start of a new build, the
z-axis is quiescent. It was thus decided to use a screw-drive
for that. The MDF build plate has eight M8 nuts attached at
its corners that are driven up and down by four M8 threaded
bars synchronised by another timing belt. The nuts are in
pairs held apart by springs to eliminate backlash.
The entire machine is designed to work from a single 12volt power supply as this can be cheaply obtained by using the
power supply from an old PC. It also means that the machine
would work off a car battery, where no main electricity was
available. The running machine consumes about 60 W of
power.
Given the choice of the fused-filament fabrication, a key –
indeed the key – part of the machine is its polymer-extruder
head. This is described in the next section.
3.1. Extruder design
Before a fused-filament fabrication extruder was designed, a
polymer had to be chosen for it to extrude. It was decided to
use polycaprolactone (PCL) initially because:
• It has a very low melting point (about 60 ◦ C).
• It is strong (comparable to nylon).
As will be seen below, this polymer was subsequently
abandoned for several reasons. But at the start, the low
melting point (implying ease of heating) was thought to be a
critical factor.
∗∗

A conjecture that the project has subsequently proved correct.

IP address: 193.140.240.110

182

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

Fig. 3. RepRap version I “Darwin”. This is the first production RepRap machine. Its rapid prototyped parts (white, blue and green) were
made in a Stratasys Dimension commercial RP machine. The cube of the machine has side lengths of about 500 mm. This machine was
built in May 2007.

A fused-filament fabrication extruder has the following
two main sub-assemblies:
1. The transport; this forces a filament of the polymer into. . .
2. . . .the melt chamber and nozzle.
It was decided to standardise on a 3-mm diameter∗ filament
as a feedstock because this dimension is commonly chosen
for plastic welding rod, which is very widely available.
3.1.1. Polymer transport. Figure 4 shows the first polymer
transport mechanism designed for RepRap. A 12-volt DC
geared electric motor (A) drives a stack of pinch wheels
(C) through gears (behind the device). The pinch wheels are
actually the heads of M4 cap screws; the outside knurling
on these gave grip. The threaded rods at the front allow the
pinch-wheels to move together, thereby increasing the pinch
force. The number of pinch wheels in the stack could be
varied. The 3-mm polymer filament (B) was driven down
into a melt chamber and nozzle at D (see figure). The control
electronics are at E. All the white parts in the photograph
except D were rapid-prototyped.
This device worked, but it was heavy and complicated.
The large number of pinch wheels in the stack (4) was needed
because of the very low friction coefficient between the pinch
wheels and the PCL (despite the knurling).
Shortly after this device was made, one of us (Olliver) came
up with a much simpler design. In it, a threaded rod is forced
against the 3-mm polymer filament, which runs in a channel.
As the thread turns, it forces the polymer downwards. This
design, which has only one moving part, gives exceptional
∗

1/8 diameter in the United States. 1/8 − 3 mm = 0.175 mm,
a difference easily accommodated by all the extruder designs that
RepRap has used.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

Fig. 4. The first RepRap polymer transport mechanism. It is shown
diagrammatically on the right: four pairs of pinch wheels are geardriven by a motor and force a 3-mm polymer filament (blue, then
orange, then red to indicate the rising temperature) down through
a PTFE insulator then through a heated brass barrel with a nozzle.
The molten polymer emerges at the nozzle’s tip.

grip even against the slipperiest polymers, and has a very
high mechanical advantage, giving a large potential extruding
force.

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

183

Fig. 5. The last screw-driven RepRap polymer transport. All green
parts are rapid-prototyped.

The design of the screw-driven extruder went through
several iterations, finally ending up as shown in Fig. 5.
The geared drive (at the top) is offset, with its torque
being transmitted by a flexible coupling (a short length of
steel hawser) – the grey curve just to the right of the white
polymer filament. This arrangement allows a straight run of
filament down the device, which it was thought might be
useful for brittle or stiff materials. However, this straight run
was never, in fact, used (the polymer was always flexible
enough to feed in at an angle). Further, the flexible drive was
a weak point in the design, as it tended to fatigue after being
used for about 50 h. The springs at the back of the device
set the force between the screw thread and the polymer,
and allowed some compliance as slight changes in polymer
diameter moved through the device.
As these developments were taking place, the temperatures
that could be easily achieved in the melt chamber (see below)

were rising because of design improvements. This meant
that it was possible to abandon PCL, which didn’t just give
problems because of its low friction, but was also very sticky
and stringy as it was being extruded. These shortcomings
led to low-quality built parts. Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
(ABS) was adopted instead. This gave much better build
quality (as it was more paste-like upon extrusion and less
viscous). ABS also allowed a return to a much simpler pinchwheel transport mechanism, as, being harder and exhibiting
higher friction, it was easier to have a firm grip.
Figure 6 shows the extruder design used in RepRap Version
II “Mendel”. A NEMA 17 stepping motor with a knurled
shaft pinches the filament against a ball-race. The motor has
a 5-mm diameter shaft. With this, a motor torque rating of
0.13 Nm is quite adequate to drive the filament with enough
force for reliable extrusion. The device has a single rapidprototyped part (silvery white). The stepping motor allows
exquisitely precise metering and control of the extruder flow.
The four screws holding the motor are in slots. This allows
the gap between the motor’s shaft and the ball-race to be
adjusted easily. For 3-mm hard-polymer filaments, a 2.5-mm
gap works well. This is easily set by putting the shank of a
2.5-mm drill-bit in the device, sliding the motor so that the
bit is just trapped between the motor’s shaft and the ball-race,
tightening the four screws, then withdrawing the drill-bit.
3.1.2. Melt chamber and extrusion nozzle. The requirements
for the melt chamber and nozzle were that it should:
1. Be cheap and easy to make;
2. Be compact;
3. Work reliably after repeated heat-up and cool-down
cycles; and
4. Not conduct excessive heat to the rest of the machine.
Point 4. was particularly important, as the rest of the
machine would be made from the polymer that the melt
chamber would be melting.
Figure 7 shows the first design of melt chamber and nozzle.
The 3-mm filament enters on the left, and is extruded from a
0.5-mm diameter nozzle on the right.

Fig. 6. Left: The newer pinch-wheel extruder transport mechanism (with melt chamber and nozzle pointing to the right). Right: The motor’s
shaft (which is knurled-the small circle) pinches the filament against a ball-race (large circle) and drives it down through a PTFE insulator
into a heated chamber and out through a nozzle.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

IP address: 193.140.240.110

184

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

Fig. 7. The first melt-chamber and nozzle design. The small squares have 1 mm sides.

The white cylinder on the left is a 16-mm diameter
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube. The internal diameter
of the hole running down it is 3.5 mm, which was found
to work well with the 3-mm filament (more on this below).
The right-hand end of the PTFE has an M6-threaded hole
extending to a depth of 15 mm, into which a length of
drilled brass M6 studding has been screwed tightly. Again,
the drilled hole in the studding is 3.5 mm in diameter.
The nozzle at the right end is turned brass. A nozzle of
0.5-mm diameter was chosen, as that is the smallest hole that
can be drilled easily and is also a good compromise between
the machine’s being able to make fine details (see below) and
its not taking too long to fill a large volume.
The heating element (the left-hand pair of wires) was a
length of fibreglass-insulated nichrome wire with a resistance
of around 10 . This was wound in the grooves of the M6
thread, giving good thermal contact. Temperature sensing
was done with a 10-K glass-bead thermistor (right-hand
wires). Both these were held on using JB Weld commercial
high-temperature epoxy, which is rated up to 315 ◦ C.
This design worked well, particularly because PTFE has
a very low thermal conductivity, which kept the rest of the
machine cool. But it suffered several shortcomings:
1. The PTFE was held in the polymer transport mechanism
by a screw clamp. It tended to slip free of this because
PTFE has a low friction coefficient (in contrast, a good
thing from the perspective of the polymer filament being
forced down the middle of it).
2. A resistance of 10  was too high, giving too low a heating
power at 12 volts.
3. The JB Weld tended to become friable and was easily
damaged after being subjected to a large number of heating
and cooling cycles.
4. The 10-K thermistor was not very accurate above about
200 ◦ C.
5. PTFE is a rather soft plastic. This meant that sometimes the
inner tube swelled under the pressure of the filament being
forced into the heated brass tube, leading to an aneurysm
of extrudate. The device continued to work while heat was
applied, but the swelling could cause blockage when the
device had cooled and was restarted.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

The problem of the PTFE slipping in its clamp was solved
by turning a series of grooves on the left-hand end of it. It was
then epoxied into the transport mechanism with the epoxy
keying into the grooves. This held completely firm.
The heater resistance was reduced to 6  in subsequent
versions. This gave an ample heating power of 24 W.
The JB Weld problem was solved by replacing it with fire
cement (which is used to seal the flues of central-heating
boilers). This is rated up to 1250 ◦ C. This fire cement was
subsequently replaced with Kapton-brand high-temperature
sticky tape; this made extruder assembly simple, clean and
neat.
The thermistor was replaced by a 100-K one. This
corrected the loss of accuracy at high temperatures.
A number of changes were tried to reduce the problem
of PTFE swelling, and this has now been completely
eliminated (see below). Improvements tried included using
polyaryletheretherketone (PEEK) instead of PTFE. This is
mechanically much stronger, but the internal friction is
higher, and so jams can occur. It is also not a good thermal
insulator, and so it has to be made longer to achieve the same
cooling effect. We also tried using a PTFE sleeve inside a
PEEK outer jacket.
One of us (Palmer) has had considerable success by
abandoning high-temperature polymers as thermal barriers
altogether and instead using stainless steel plus a heat-sink
(Fig. 8). Here, the heating is provided by a 6.8  resistor
embedded in an aluminium block heating a copper nozzle.
This is connected to the polymer filament transport by a
stainless steel tube cooled by a heat-sink and small fan.
As stainless steel has a low conductivity (for a metal), it is
possible to maintain a high-temperature differential between
the two ends. But the device can still jam. This problem can
be solved by adding a very slight taper into the hole down the
centre of the device from narrow at the top to broader at the
bottom. This means that as soon as the cold polymer begins
to move when the device is started, it detaches from the walls
and is subjected to almost no friction. This is a very reliable
design.
The current standard RepRap extrude nozzle is also very
reliable. In it, the brass nozzle is made larger in diameter than
before, and encases the end of the PTFE. When pressure

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

185

Fig. 8. The stainless steel heat-sink melt-chamber and nozzle.

Fig. 9. The latest standard RepRap nozzle design partly
disassembled. The PTFE ends in a narrow section that screws inside
the brass. The PEEK bracket is the part with three holes. The brown
material at the top of the PTFE is Kapton tape to ensure a snug fit
in the extruder transport mechanism.

causes the PTFE to swell, this forces it against the brass,
constraining it and creating a better seal. A small PEEK
bracket attaches the brass nozzle to the rest of the extruder
mechanism so that none of the extrude force is born by the
PTFE (see Fig. 9).

4. The RepRap Build Materials
Polycaprolactone was quickly abandoned as a building
material after initial experiments for the reasons outlined

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

above. Though it is extremely tough, it is also quite flexible.
For building the RepRap machine, something more rigid –
that is with a higher Young’s modulus – was desirable. The
Young’s modulus for PCL is about 1 Gpa, and that for ABS
is about 3 Gpa.∗ ABS was chosen next, as it is inexpensive
and very widely available.
Figure 10 shows a typical RepRap build of a reasonably
large (80 mm × 60 mm × 30 mm) component using ABS
extruded at 240 ◦ C. As can be seen, the contraction of the
ABS on solidification has caused the bottom of the part
to curl away from the base upon which it was built. For
smaller parts, this is much less of a problem, but here it is
significant. Commercial fused-filament fabrication machines
solve this problem by running the entire process in an oven
at a temperature of about 70 ◦ C. This eliminates curl-up
with ABS completely. However, since the point of RepRap
is that it should be easy for any technically competent person
to construct and to run the machine at home in order that
its dissemination should be as wide as possible, running in
an oven was not really an option. We did experiment with
enclosing the build in a roasting bag (intended for joints of
meat) and filling it with hot air from a hair dryer. This worked
very well and completely eliminated the problem. But the bag
was tricky to set up, it tended to get tangled in the moving
mechanism and a lot of work was required to unload the built
parts from within it.
Parallel to the emergence of this curling-up problem, one
of us (Olliver) was experimenting with the use of polylactic
acid (PLA) as a RepRap building material. PLA is slightly
harder and more brittle than ABS. These experiments were
not prompted by a need to solve distortion in builds, but by
ecological and socio-political considerations. PLA is made
from plants and is biodegradable. Its use in RepRap would
thus be more environmentally benign than the use of an
oil-based polymer, such as ABS. Indeed, as PLA is made
from plant matter, building durable objects from it that are
kept and not bio-degraded would lock up atmospheric CO2 ;
this would be environmentally positive as opposed to merely
neutral. In addition, it is not too hard for people having access
to a small starch crop to make their own PLA.∗∗ This means
that such a person with a RepRap machine would not only be
able to make the rapid-prototyped parts to reproduce more
RepRaps and to make other goods, but would also be able
to do so with a home-grown polymer supply that was also
self-reproducing. And they would be reducing greenhouse
gas as they worked.
Serendipitously, it transpires that PLA suffers minimally
from contraction problems on cooling, even when builds are
conducted in a room-temperature environment.

∗

Of course, these values are very dependent on the degree of
polymerisation.
∗∗
There is one step in the synthesis that is not straightforward: the
lactic acid that results from the fermentation of starch has to be
dried to better than one-part in 10 million by weight of water. We
have succeeded in doing this by simply passing dry nitrogen over
it for half an hour with heating. We conjecture that it would also be
possible to do it with air that had been dried by passing it through
calcium chloride and then heated. The calcium chloride could in
turn be reused after drying by heating.

IP address: 193.140.240.110

186

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

Fig. 10. A RepRap extruder component made in a RepRap machine from ABS. Note the curling at the base.

available from a small number of companies) is that it
tends to “string” slightly, leaving filaments sticking out
from builds where the extrude head has left the build for
an in-air movement. This problem can be eliminated by
reversing the extruder by a short distance at the end of
each completed deposition before an in-air movement. Any
remaining stringing can be removed manually with a blade
in a few seconds after the build is completed.

Fig. 11. A clock made by a RepRap machine from PLA. The face
was made from 12 separate segments, each a longest dimension of
140 mm. (The rather scruffy octagonal backplate is the MDF-built
platform from an old experimental prototype made to try out ideas
for the machine in Fig. 3.)

Figure 11 shows a clock made on a RepRap machine
from PLA extruded at 190 ◦ C. The twelve hour-segments
were made separately. Each is 140-mm long in its radial
direction. With other polymers significant curling would be
expected when building such an object, but PLA gives almost
completly flat parts.
In addition to its positive environmental characteristics
and its lack of distortion on building, PLA welds to itself
very strongly when one fused-filament fabrication layer is
being deposited on top of another. Parts made from it are
less susceptible to delamination under stress in the verticalbuild direction than those made from ABS. It is an almost
perfect material for the fused-filament fabrication process. Its
disadvantage (aside from the fact that it is only commercially

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

5. RepRap Software
A number of people have created software to drive RepRap
machines. Here we describe our program written in Java to
take STL files of the objects that RepRap is to make, to slice
those, to compute infill patterns and to save the results as
G-Code NC control files (the format that RepRap expects).
For convenience, the same program can also take such precomputed G-Code files (from any source) and queue them to
a RepRap machine.
Figure 12 shows this software being run. On the left
is a window that allows the user to control the attached
RepRap machine interactively for setting up, testing and
experimentation. On the right is a view of the machine’s
build base with a set of components (in fact, parts of the
RepRap machine itself) loaded for manufacture.
The user can interactively view these components from
any point, move around parts with a mouse, insert new parts
and delete unwanted ones. The whole collection can be saved
in a single file for future use, if required.
In order to generate the control codes for the RepRap
machine, the software takes a series of horizontal slices
through the STL files making up the parts to be built. As STL
files consist entirely of triangles, this is simply a question of
working out the line segments that result from the intersection
of those triangles with the slicing plane. These are then joined
into polygons by finding nearest end-points of lines.
The software then uses Tang and Woo’s Algorithm16 to
convert those polygons into an interim CSG representation
as intersections and unions of linear half-planes of the form

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

187

Fig. 12. The user’s view of the Java RepRap software.

Ax + By + C < = 0. This is done because a CSG
representation is much more robust than a boundary
representation. If the STL input is wrong, the shapes will be
wrong (that is unavoidable). But with CSG they are always
topologically consistent.
The CSG polygons are then converted to bitmaps at
the finest resolution of the RepRap machine. This is done
because Boolean operations will have to be done on the
slices represented, and this is simplest if they are in bitmap
form. It might be thought that the CSG representation would
be ideally suited to Boolean manipulation, and indeed our
software worked that way initially. But problems arose
with repeated Boolean operations on patterns that were
very similar but (because of rounding and other factors)
not identical. Bitmaps completely eliminate these problems,
and – an added advantage – can be processed very fast.
The slices are computed from the top to the bottom of the
parts to be built. This allows the easy calculation of support
material: layer Ln+1 needs the following support, Sn , from
layer Ln :
Sn = Ln+1 − Ln .
Moreover, the layer pattern at n potentially requiring
support at layer n − 1 would be
Ln ← Ln U Ln+1 .
As can be seen, this calculation is most easily facilitated
from top downwards.
In fact, the software maintains a cache of layer patterns in
a ring buffer because it is useful to know the patterns a few
above and a few below the current slices for the purpose of
computing fine infill at the surface when coarse infill is being
used for interiors: a horizontally exposed surface facing either
up or down has to be fine-filled to get a well-finished part.
The cache ensures that slices are computed only once, while
not making the excessive memory demands that keeping a
complete slice record would entail.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

Once a slice has been computed, the outline polygons
are found using a pixel edge-finder plus a filter to collapse
straight sections of many pixels back to a single line segment
(the filter picks out runs of pixels that would be generated by
a Bressenham DDA between their endpoints, and replaces
them with those endpoints).
The infill hatch is again generated using a Bressenham
DDA. When the DDA goes from an empty pixel to a filled
one that is the start of a hatch segment; the reverse is its end.
The resulting hatch lines are joined by traversing sections
of polygon boundary between their ends to produce a set of
zig-zag lines filling the polygon.
The Java RepRap software can deal with multiple objects,
each made from multiple materials. It contains all the internal
controls to allow these to be outlined, filled and supported in a
completely general way. Thus, an object made from material
A can be outlined for one or more times going inwards (to
make a thin or thick boundary); it can then be filled with
material A with any hatching width, with the hatch angles
changing between layers; it can be supported by material A
laid down thinly to make it easy to break off after completion.
Alternatively, the above can be done with differing materials
A, B and C. Finally, multi-material objects can be specified,
and their peripheries and interiors can be made in the same
completely controlled way.
6. Reproduction of RepRap Machines
The first reproduced RepRap machine was made in 2008.
The parent machine is the one shown in Fig. 3. All the rapid
prototyped parts of the child machine were made in PLA by
the parent machine, except for one grandchild part (a timingbelt tensioner) that the child machine made for itself. That
grandchild part was the first part made by the child. It took
about 20 minutes to make, and was finished at 1400 h UTC
on 29 May 2008 at Bath University in the United Kingdom.
The child machine was within tolerance of the parent, and
worked just as well. RepRap is thus a kinematic-assisted selfreplicating, self-manufacturing machine. The design of the
machine includes screw and other adjusters to allow a child

IP address: 193.140.240.110

188

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

machine to be set up to produce parts as accurately as its
parent (in just the same way as conventional machine tools
are adjusted). RepRap assisted replication is thus not subject
to degeneracy. However, its accuracy does, of course, depend
upon the measurements made to achieve the adjustments just
mentioned, and the measuring instruments (typically digital
callipers) are – like the motors and so on – external to the
machine. It would doubtless be possible to set up a calibration
scheme depending on light interference or similar that could
be a part of RepRap itself. But this would be a heroic effort
to overcome a simple externality and, as we shall show in the
next paragraph, RepRap has many of those.
The fraction of the parts by count of the RepRap machine
that it makes for itself is 48% ignoring fasteners (that is, nuts,
bolts and washers – if these are included, then they are 73%
by count of the machine and the RP parts drop to 13%).14 It
would be straightforward to make a much simpler and rather
cheaper machine of an almost identical design by gluing the
parts together rather than using nuts and bolts. The machine
could easily make small cylindrical locating lugs to fit in the
bolt holes and to hold the gluing parts in the correct relative
positions while the glue set, but that would make it harder to
replace parts in the machine and to service it.
Many people have downloaded the RepRap designs from
the project website and used them to make RepRaps in commercial rapid prototyping machines. In one case (father and
son constructors Bruce and Nick Wattendorf) the design was
cut from wood, assembled and made to work successfully.
The RepRap community calls free open-source rapid
prototyping machines that cannot make a significant fraction
of their own parts, but can make parts for RepRap machines,
RepStraps (from bootstrap). Many private individuals
(including one of us – Palmer) have made RepStraps in
order to make RepRaps subsequently. Several companies
have been formed to make and sell RepStraps (for example,
Bits From Bytes in the United Kingdom, and MakerBot
Industries LLC in the United States). As required by the
GPL, these companies’ RepRap-derived designs are being
distributed free and open-source.
Developed independently of RepRap, though inspired
by it, the Fab@Home fused-filament fabrication machine
from Cornell15 is laser-cut, as are the Bits From Bytes
and MakerBot machines. Fab@Home works primarily with
a variety of pastes (including UV-setting resin), though a
thermoplastic extrusion head has also been attached to it.
The Bits From Bytes machine is almost identical in size and
capability to RepRap I “Darwin”. The MakerBot machine is
smaller than “Darwin”, but is about the same size as RepRap
II “Mendel” (see below), though with a smaller build area.
Both these commercial machines tend to be used with ABS,
though some of their users have also built with PLA. Both
Bits From Bytes and MakerBot can make all the parts for
RepRap. We have heard no reports of this having been done
with a Fab@Home, though there seems to be no technical
impediment to its happening.
Increasingly, people are using their RepRap machines to
make sets of RepRap parts for others, as the project plan
intended.
The first complete set of rapid prototyped parts made
in one RepRap machine that were sold to other would-

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

be RepRap constructors were made by Wade Bortz from
Canada. The child machine’s parts were bought by Liav
Koren and Michael Bartosik of Toronto, who paid one case
of Upper Canada Dark Ale for them∗ . Given the analogy with
the payment of nectar for flower reproduction discussed in
Section 2, the case of beer is particularly appropriate.
Owing to the free distribution of the machine it is difficult
to make a worldwide estimate of the number of RepRaps
and RepStraps there are, but the sale of electronic kits for the
machine (which are also produced commercially) sets a lower
limit of 3000 machines. However, some people construct
their own electronic kits rather than buying from market.
About 4500 machines would seem to be a conservative
estimate of the total population at the time of writing this
paper (i.e., in 2010).
The RepRap website invites builders of the machine to
mark their location on a map. Figure 13 shows this map
as in 2010. Only a small fraction of builders have placed
themselves on it, but it gives an interesting (if self-selected)
sample of the distribution of the machines.
7. Changes Made to Produce RepRap Version II
The authors and their many RepRap colleagues around the
world have now finished the design and commissioning of
the latest RepRap machine: RepRap Version II “Mendel”∗∗
(Fig. 14). This incorporates many lessons that were learnt
from Version I; in particular, lots of improvements and
suggestions from the worldwide RepRap community that
were posted on-line in the project’s forums have been
included in the design.
Table I gives a comparison between RepRap Version I
“Darwin” and RepRap Version II “Mendel”. The cost-ofmaterials-to-build figures are for a single purchase of all
that is required to build one machine from end retailers –
it takes no account of bulk discounts and wholesale
transactions.
The designs of both machines allow their sizes and working
volumes to be changed simply by cutting longer or shorter
rods to make up the framework, so the values for both of
these are nominal.
Darwin may be carried a short distance by one person
with some difficulty. “Mendel”, in contrast, can be swung
in one hand like a bulky briefcase, and is easy to carry
anywhere. This has turned out to be a surprisingly important
improvement – portability makes it more convenient to work
with the machine in many contexts.
The percentage of the machine that “Mendel” makes for
itself has remained constant in comparison to “Darwin”,
despite a significant number of rolling element bearings being
incorporated into the design to give robustness. Furthermore,
some users in the community have replaced these bearings
with plain bearings. In this case, the self-manufactured
percentage rises to 57%. It is anticipated that the number
of self-manufactured parts will rise further once the multiple
write-heads are finished (see below).
∗

At the time of writing, the lowest cost of non-open source rapid
prototyping machine (the V-Flash made by 3D Systems) was about
$ 9900.
∗∗
It has been decided to name RepRap versions after distinguished
biologists.

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

189

Fig. 13. Some of the world’s RepRap users in 2010 (courtesy: Google Maps). (A few users who do not wish to reveal their location have
put themselves in the ocean.)

The deposition rate of 15 mL/h is the volume extruded
by the extruder. In common with poprietary fused-filament
fabrication machines, RepRap does not usually build parts
completely solid – there are some air inclusions. With
RepRap the degree to which this happens is completely
under the control of the user. It is possible to build parts
very fast with a sparse honeycomb interior, or more slowly
with a dense interior. Unlike the commercial fused-filament
fabrication machines (which leave micro-voids on their
densest settings), RepRap also allows interiors to be built
fully dense. This slightly reduces the build quality, but allows
the making of gas- and water-tight parts. With the nominal
settings of the machine, the 15 mL/h deposition rate becomes
19 mL/h of built object.
We have not gathered reliability statistics on the machine
as yet (it is very easy to make spare parts, so repair is not
a problem), but a “Mendel” machine will typically run for

several hundred hours without going wrong, though it might
need occasional fine adjustments in that time (for example
to the bed-height zero-position, or the filament pinch drive
mechanism).
As has been mentioned above, an 0.5-mm nozzle diameter
was chosen as a compromise between ease of manufacture,
speed of deposition and fineness of feature resolution.
However, it is perfectly possible to make nozzles of different
diameters without changing any other aspect of the RepRap
machine’s design. Drilling very small holes is difficult, of
course. But as Jens Kaufmann of Heriot Watt University has
suggested that it might be possible to make fine nozzles by
running copper sulphate solution through an 0.5-mm brass
nozzle and electroplating copper onto its inner surface – an
experiment that we have yet to try. With the 0.5-mm nozzle,
the smallest features that we have produced (gear teeth for
the machine itself) are of about 1.5-mm in size.

Fig. 14. RepRap Version II “Mendel”. This version is smaller, lighter and simpler than Version I, but it has a larger build volume.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

IP address: 193.140.240.110

190

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper
Table I. Comparison of “Darwin” and “Mendel”.

Cost of materials to build (€)
Percentage self-manufactured∗
Size (mm3 )
Weight (kg)
Build envelope (mm3 )
Deposition rate (mL/h)
Positioning accuracy (mm)
Nozzle diameter (mm)
Volume of RP parts to build (mL)
Power supply (W)
Interface
Host computer

RepRap version I “Darwin”

RepRap version II “Mendel”

500
48
600 (W) × 520 (D) × 650 (H)
14
200 (W) × 150 (D) × 100 (H)
15
0.1
0.5
1200
12 V × 8 A
USB/G-Codes
Linux, Windows or Mac

350
48
500 (W) × 400 (D) × 360 (H)
7
200 (W) × 200 (D) × 140 (H)
15
0.1
0.5
1110
12 V × 5 A
USB/G-Codes
Linux, Windows or Mac

We are currently working to add the final part of the
“Mendel” design: a multi-extruder head that would allow
the machine to print with multiple materials. The reader will
recall that this potential was one of the initial reasons for
choosing fused-filament fabrication for RepRap. We also
have a paste extruder in the later stages of development
(driven by compressed air from a fizzy-drink bottle acting
as a reservoir and charged using a car tyre pump). This
should allow RepRap access to a wide range of materials
already proved in fused-filament fabrication by the opensource Fab@Home project mentioned above.
8. Conclusions
There is no space here to go into every last reason for
adopting certain designs for parts of RepRap and rejecting
others, nor to describe all the many alternatives that were
experimented upon and not adopted because of the results of
those experiments. All this information is, however, available
in copious detail on the RepRap blogs, forums and wiki
(http://reprap.org).
At the start of 2008 four RepRap machines existed, all
made on commercial rapid prototyping machines. Two and
a half years later we conservatively estimate that there are
about 4500 derived machines all over the world. We have
no way of telling how many of those are replicated RepRap
machines, and how many are non-replicating RepStraps for
making further RepRaps. However, judging by the large
number of requests for the fused-filament fabricated parts
for the “Mendel” design when it was released, lots of people
want to make, to use and to distribute their own assisted
replicator.
One of the members of the RepRap project (Zach Smith)
has set up a website where anyone can upload and download
free designs for consumer goods to be printed by RepRap and
other rapid prototyping machines (http://thingiverse.com).
This is a considerable success, with many new designs being
added daily.
RepRap works well. Nevertheless, even a poor reproducer
that is out in the world freely parenting children must improve
by Darwinian selection, and so should eventually overtake
even the most exquisitely designed reproducer that stays in
the laboratory.
∗

Ignoring nuts, bolts and washers.

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

The reader will note that this paper contains no details of
the future direction of the RepRap project. The reason for
this is that the authors are no longer in control of it. They
will contribute to future developments, but increasingly those
developments come from people in the RepRap community,
and what they will do is well nigh impossible to predict.
All human engineering can be considered to be a vast unitgrowth reproducer that copies itself with the assistance of –
and with benefit to – humanity; a grand version of von
Neumann’s well-equipped machine shop. RepRap is moving
towards compressing as much of that idea as possible into a
unit-reproducer that one human may carry in one hand, and
may freely copy for their friends.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the United Kingdom’s Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council and Bath
University’s Innovative Design and Manufacturing Research
Centre for the provision of research grants that funded
significant parts of this work. We acknowledge with gratitude
the suggestions made by the reviewers for improvements in
this paper. Finally, we would also like to thank the worldwide
RepRap community for their continuous volunteering of
ideas, designs, physical prototypes, software, corrections
and suggestions. Without them the project would be but a
shadow of what it has become through their unflagging input
and support.
References
1. C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical Theory of Communication,”
The Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379–423, 623–656 (Jul.–Oct. 1948).
(http://tinyurl.com/f4two)
2. R. A. Freitas and R. C. Merkle, Kinematic Self-Replicating
Machines (Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, Texas, 2004).
(http://www.molecularassembler.com/KSRM.htm)
3. J. Von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata
(University of Illinois Press, Illinois, 1996).
4. A. G. Cairns-Smith, The Life Puzzle (University of Toronto
Press, Toronto, Ontario, 1971).
5. F. J. Dyson, “The world, the flesh, and the devil. Selfreproducing machinery,” In: The Third J. D. Bernal Lecture,
Birkbeck College, London (May 16, 1972).
6. L. S. Penrose, “Mechanics of self-reproduction,” Ann.
Hum. Genetics 23, 59–72 (1958). (http://vx.netlux.org/lib/
mlp01.html)
7. M. Moses, A Physical Prototype of a Self-Replicating
Universal Constructor Masters Thesis (Mechanical

IP address: 193.140.240.110

RepRap – The replicating rapid prototyper

191

Engineering, New Mexico: University of New Mexico,
2002). (http://home.earthlink.net/ mmoses152/SelfRep. doc)
8. J. Suthakorn, A. B. Cushing and G. S. Chirikjian, “An
Autonomous Self-Replicating Robotic System,” Proceedings
of the IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM 2003), Kobe, Japan (December
2003). (http://tinyurl.com/ylfgr9b)
9. V. Zykov E. Mytilinaios, B. Adams and H. Lipson,
“Self-reproducing machines,” Nature, 435, 163 (2005).
(http://tinyurl.com/ygozg37)
10. R. A. Freitas and W. P. Gilbreath, “Advanced Automation
for Space Missions,” Proceedings of the NASA Conference Publication CP-2255 (N83-15348), Summer 1980
(1982). (http://www.islandone.org/MMSG/aasm/ accessed 22
November 2010)
11. S. Butler, Erewhon, (1872). (http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/
1906)

http://journals.cambridge.org

Downloaded: 13 Nov 2014

12. R. Stallman et al. The GNU General Public License (Free Software Foundation, Inc., Boston, MA, 1991). (http://www.gnu.
org/licenses/gpl.html)
13. S. S. Crump, 1989. US Patent 5121329: Apparatus and Method
for Creating Three-Dimensional Objects (Stratasys Inc., Eden
Prairie, MN, 1989) (http://tinyurl.com/ybtrkft)
14. E. A. Sells, Towards a Self-Manufacturing Rapid Prototyping
Machine Ph.D. thesis (Bath, UK: University of Bath, 2009).
(http://tinyurl.com/ygjgva7)
15. E. Malone and H. Lipson, “The Factory in your Kitchen,”
Proceedings of the MCPC 2007 World Conference on Mass
Customization & Personalization, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
(October 7–10, 2007).
16. K. Tang and T. C. Woo, “Algorithmic aspects of alternating
sum of volumes. Part 1: Data structure and difference
operation,” Comp. Aided Des. 23 (5): 357–366 (1991).
(http://tinyurl.com/yg4wucm)

IP address: 193.140.240.110

