The Machine to End All Machines – Towards SelfReplicating Machines on the Moon
Alex Ellery
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering
Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
613-520-2600 ext 1027
aellery@mae.carleton.ca

Abstract— We present the notion of a self-replicating machine
for deployment on the Moon to leverage space colonization by
exploiting its resources. The utility of self-replication cannot be
understated – it offers the means to create an exponentially
increasing general productive capacity on the Moon
unconstrained by launch costs. Initially, we review the idea of
physical self-replicating machines, emphasizing the universal
constructor. The key to the universal construction mechanism
necessary to realise self-replication is, we hypothesise, 3D
printing. To date, 3D printing has been demonstrating its
versatility in manufacturing structures, albeit of great
sophistication. We briefly review 3D printing methods to date
and suggest that fused deposition modeling and electron beam
additive manufacturing offer a complete 3D printing capability
suitable for deployment on the Moon. In our pursuit of a selfreplicating machine, we have been working on 3D printing
mechatronic components - electric motors, and to a lesser
extent, electronics - as necessary steps to realizing 3D printing
entire robotic machines in general (universal constructor) and
3D printers in particular (self-replicating machine). This 3D
printer is essentially a core part of the payload for a rover
vehicle which scours the lunar environment for the basic
materials required for its own construction.

solutions to our current global climate problems [1]. Selfreplicating machines have been proposed to build solar
power satellites (SPS), particularly photovoltaic arrays but
without consideration of any mechanism to implement such
a system [2]. The advent of self-replicating machines has
the prospect of transforming space exploration by offering
space mission concepts that are hitherto considered too
expensive to pursue [3]. Self-replication offers exponential
growth in general purpose productive capacity that may be
exploited to create a vast extraterrestrial infrastructure at
low cost.
We hypothesise that 3D printing of multiple materials –
plastic, metal, glass and ceramic - offers a universal
construction mechanism. With this in mind, we are
approaching the problem of constructing a self-replicating
machine from lunar resources from a bottom-up perspective.
The lunar resources to which we are limited include
regolith-derived volatiles (hydrogen and carbon compound),
regolith itself (glass, silicon and iron) and asteroid-derived
material from impact basins (nickel, cobalt, tungsten and
selenium). Our self-replicating machine may be envisaged
as a large mobile rover mounting bucket wheels, loading
shovels, excavator buckets, drills, rockjaws, grinding
tumblers, pump-driven unit chemical processors, 3D
printers, milling tools, lathes, ball mills, extruders, assembly
manipulators, etc. The key components of all these robotic
devices are electric motors and supporting electronics on the
assumption that structures will be relatively trivial to
construct in comparison. By 3D printing motors and their
electronic controllers, all forms of kinematic machinery can
be constructed, i.e. any robotic machine including a
universal constructor. We have been making significant
progress in developing the first 3D printed electric motors
and high capacity control electronics – this is described after
reviewing a number of key concepts.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION ....................................................... 1
2. SELF-REPLICATING MACHINES ............................ 1
3. SELF-REPLICATING LUNAR ROVER ...................... 2
4. IN-SITU RESOURCES............................................... 5
5. 3D PRINTING AS UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTION ..... 6
6. 3D PRINTING ELECTRIC MOTORS ...................... 10
7. 3D PRINTABLE ELECTRONICS ............................. 11
8. CONCLUSIONS ....................................................... 12
APPENDIX: TURING MACHINES .............................. 12
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................ 13
REFERENCES............................................................. 13
BIOGRAPHY .............................................................. 17

2. SELF-REPLICATING MACHINES
We briefly review the concept of self-replicating machines
in the context of space exploration with an emphasis on
hardware approaches. It has been suggested that selfreplicating robots will be forthcoming from the artificial
cells of synthetic biology before mechanical self-replicators
emerge [4]. We disagree.

1. INTRODUCTION
Our objective is the implementation of self-replicating
machines on the Moon with potential applications in
constructing solar shields and solar power satellites as
978-1-5386-2014-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

1

The original model of self-replication was the von Neumann
self-replicating kinematic machine [5]. It comprised four
major subsystems – (A) a universal constructing machine to
manipulate material and construct what is specified by the
computing machine C (akin to ribosomes); (B) a tape copier
that copies the tape of the Turing machine C (akin to
RNA/DNA polymerase); (C) a universal computing
(Turing) machine to manipulate information on a program
tape to instruct the universal constructor A (akin to
repressor/depressor molecules); (IA+B+C) a program tape
containing a construction blueprint of the entire kinematic
machine (akin to DNA). The key concept is the universal
constructor, a machine that can build any machine specified
by the instructions on the tape including a copy of itself, i.e.
self-replication is derivative from universal construction.
The von Neumann self-replicator overcomes the infinite
regress problem by using the program tape in two ways – as
interpreted instructions (by the universal constructor) and as
uninterpreted instructions (by the tape copier). The universal
constructor was envisaged as an abstract manipulator arm
embedded in a sea of component parts. The manipulator
inspects and acquires parts and assembles them according to
the program stored on the memory tape. The selection of
elementary parts (e.g. wire – NOR-gate – prismatic joint –
rotary joint – connecting link – disconnect link) is assumed
to be based on visual inspection which implies sophisticated
image processing or some kind of visual markers to permit
ready distinguishability of parts [6]. Once construction of
the copy is complete, the memory tape is copied and
inserted into the physical copy. A variation on the notion of
inspecting and selecting parts in the environment is to selfinspect (self-program) and self-replicate on the basis of selfinspection rather than a pre-existing tape of instructions but
there is no analogue of this capability in nature (it
effectively implies Lamarckian evolution) [7].

Thus, the idea of a self-replicating factory on the Moon is
not new [9]. The 1980 NASA study proposed that a 100
tonne seed factory be deployed onto the Moon comprising
eight subsystems. However, technology has advanced
considerably since this study enabling further developments.
The Chirikjian architecture comprised four subsystems [10].
It was realised through Lego Mindstorms kits supplemented
with electrical and magnetic connectors to build a number of
self-assembling robot prototypes constructed from coarse
modules on a flat surface with printed ground lines and barcoded landmarks for optical tracking. This is an example of
environmental structuring to reduce “real world”
complexities – this also occurs in biological systems in the
form of cell membranes [11]. All biological cellular
processes are pre-programmed genetically and regulated
through homeostasis within a cellular enclosure to maintain
a controlled intracellular environment. Similarly, the selfreplicating machine must maintain a highly structured
environment to minimise variance. The number of states in
the Chirikjian-Suthakorn model was small with three basic
line-tracking behaviours determined by four simple types of
sensors (optical readers, contact sensors, metal detection
sensor and touch sensor) [12]. The simplest configuration
comprised seven modules – left and right motors, left and
right wheels, manipulator wrist and passive gripper, and a
microcontroller receiver – supplemented by assembly
fixtures to force alignments. A second, more complex robot
required three separate subassembly stations for chassis, left
and right motor-track, and motorised gripper subassemblies.
The motor-track assembly station included a hooking
system while the motorised gripper assembly station
included a ramp and both had controller units and light
sensors. The assembled robot included the RCX
microcontroller brick in the chassis assembly.

The von Neumann kinematic model was later supplanted by
the von Neumann self-replicating cellular automation (CA)
model of which a hardware logic circuit version has been
implemented [8]. The self-replicating CA model comprised
29 transition states including a quiescent state, 16
transmission states responsible for propagating excitations
(OR gates), 4 confluence states (AND gates) and 8 sensorbased construction states. A pulser outputs a sequence of
excitations when it receives an input (fan out); a decoder
outputs an excitation when it receives a sequence of inputs
(fan in). The hardware model comprised a set of “biodules”
(comprising an FPGA computation unit with a dot matrix
display unit) forming a small interconnected cellular array
to emulate a small subset of the 100,000-200,000 cell array.
However, this implementation yielded little insight into the
problem of designing a physical self-replicating machine.

3. SELF-REPLICATING LUNAR ROVER
We have discussed self-assembling systems that assume
prefabricated components and modules. A more complete
architecture of a lunar self-replicating machine that
incorporated in-situ resource utilization (ISRU) has been
under development [13]. From a practical perspective, a real
world system will involve a series of mining, chemical
processing and factory processes: (i) material mining to
extract mineral ores; (ii) chemical processing of ores to
extract purified materials; (iii) forming of parts through
manufacturing methods; (iv) inspection and assembly of
parts in subsystems/systems. We shall address (iii) in this
paper but will touch on some of the other aspects in this
section. The three main lunar self-replicating architectures
discussed here are summarized in Table 1. We submit that
the Ellery architecture is the most complete of the three.

Hardware implementation of the kinematic model has also
been attempted, primarily in an extraterrestrial context.

2

Table 1. Comparison of lunar self-replicating architecture
Freitas architecture [Freitas &
Gilbreath 1980]
Paving robots to fuse regolith to form
the factory foundation
Mining robots based on front
loader/bulldozer configuration for
strip mining, cellar excavation and
hauling of ore
Thermochemical processing system
to beneficiate, chemically extract
purified elements using HF acid
leaching
Fabrication system for casting and
laser machining of aluminium,
magnesium, steel, and basalt parts
excluding electronics fabrication
Assembly system by manipulators
with buffering through warehousing

Computing and communications
system to implement production
planning, scheduling and operations
(imported from Earth)
Transponder triangulation network
that functions to support selflocalisation and navigation similar to
GPS
Energy plant comprising an overhead
canopy of photovoltaic solar cells to
supply 2 MW

Dispersion by radial growth

Chirikjian
architecture
[Chirikjian et al 2002]

Ellery architecture [Ellery 2016]
Fresnel lens-based sinterer/melter

Multifunctional robots with tooling
for strip mining, excavation and
transport of material within a 1 km2
area
Thermochemical processing system
to reduce mineral oxides

Casting in sintered regolith for
mechanical parts

Assembly system based on
specialised
rover-mounted
manipulators for assembly of its
constituent parts
Excluded from self-replication
process

Multifunctional tracked robot(s) with
bucket wheels and biomimetic drill for
regolith acquisition.
Magnetic/electrostatic
beneficiation,
thermochemical reduction of mineral
oxides, FFC Cambridge process, Mond
process
Metal (various steels), silicone plastic,
silica glass and silica/alumina 3D
printing supplemented by milling
including electrical components
Assembly system based on general
purpose rover-mounted manipulators
for assembly of its constituent parts
Hardware neural net computing based
on vacuum tube technology

Simple reactive behaviours based
on simple electromechanical relay
circuits

Hardware neural SLAM and neural
feedback/forward models

Solar energy generation, storage
and distribution based on mirrorbased solar concentrators for
thermal energy, photovoltaic solar
cells for electrical energy and fuel
cell storage
Electromagnetic railguns to deliver
offspring to long-distance random
locations

Fresnel lens-based thermal energy
generation with thermionic conversion
for electrical energy

Mining robotics has been driven by two factors – the
hazardous character of mining to human life and the
challenges of extracting valuable material from diminishing
grades of ore. Mining has adopted autonomous trucks,
loaders and trains for material transport augmented by
autonomous drilling and rock-breaking robotic machines.
There are several methods for acquiring and transporting
regolith: (i) rover vehicles; (ii) rail or tram vehicles; (iii)
cable-driven buckets; (iv) conveyors; (v) pipelines; (vi)
ballistic/rocket transport. Ballistic/rocket transport is
generally reserved for transport to orbit from the lunar
surface rather than local transport. The use of pipelines for
regolith
transport
is
considered
inefficient.
Cableway/dragline carriage system suspending a Stewart
platform to lift and haul loads offers one approach to lunar
excavation/construction [14]. The cableway comprised a
cable track of braided metal wires, elevated supports at both
ends of the track cable, and a trolley carrier (such as a

Electromagnetic railgun/launcher

Stewart platform) that rides the track cable. The dragline
excavator is a variation in which hoist cable suspends a
bucket near vertically from a long truss boom and is pulled
by a horizontal drag cable through the terrain to scoop up
overburden. The cableway/dragline lends itself to
automation more readily than rover vehicles by virtue of its
simplicity of operation – hoist, drag and slew to move the
bucket through a simple trajectory – while itself being
positioned adjacent from the excavation site [15]. Railways
for transport require considerable infrastructure so are
generally discarded for lunar application. Although it has
been suggested that rover platforms may not be the most
efficient of excavation construction machines [16], most
lunar mining concepts are in fact based around roving
vehicles with wheeled or tracked chassis for transport,
digging, excavating and levelling using a diverse set of
attachments such as bulldozing blade, soil scoop, backhoe
bucket, etc.
3

Rover vehicles, like cableways/draglines can be used for
both excavation and transport but without the infrastructure
overhead. Surface mining requires a multirole rover vehicle
to perform several functions – ripper excavation, load-hauldumping, drilling, etc. The self-replicating rover may be
armed with a mechanism to acquire raw material for further
processing. There are several methods of excavating
regolith: (i) blade or bucket mechanism; (ii) drilling; (iii)
explosives. We propose a bucket wheel system to scoop
regolith [17] and a drill for subsurface acquisition of buried
asteroid ores (average meteoritic component of lunar
regolith is only 1%) [18]. We have considered mining
aspects – in particular, excavation methods - in detail
elsewhere [19].

Fig 1. (a) Kapvik instrumented rocker-bogie chassis
(actual); (b) Kapvik with elastic loop mobility system
(model)
The rover must also include further processing which we
assume occurs in a self-contained rover payload package –
this eliminates the requirement for hauling and dumping of
raw material. The ExoMars rover Pasteur payload comprises
a robotic laboratory including a sample preparation and
analysis system serviced by a central 6 DOF robotic
manipulator with dexterous gripper [26] – it represents a
rudimentary factory. The RESOLVE payload as an in-situ
resource utilization package is more representative of what
is required [27]. The rover must incorporate a
thermochemical processing system more extensive than the
RESOLVE payload including a Fresnel lens-based solar
power source, fractional distillation column for condensing
regolith volatiles, foundry for smelting minerals and FFC
Cambridge electrolysis cell for reducing mineral oxides and
purifying metals [28]. The ubiquitous nanophase iron grains
impregnating all lunar dust particles impart high magnetic
susceptibility to lunar dust. This high magnetic
susceptibility may be exploited through microwave
processing as microwaves couple with iron strongly [29]. It
offers high heating rates ~1000o/min up to 2000oC but at a
cost of high electrical power consumption. The energy plant
is based on Fresnel lens concentrators supplemented by
thermionic conversion and flywheel energy storage.

Rotary drilling is often selected for extraterrestrial use by
default for its maturity. However, vibratory percussion can
reduce the penetration forces required (e.g. ultrasonic/sonic
drilling system [20] which potentially favours the novel bioinspired woodwasp design of percussive drill [21].
Compressed water vapour (assuming its abundance on the
Moon) could provide drilling fluid for cooling and for the
removal of cuttings. Self-casing thermal drilling eliminates
the requirement for borehole casing and drilling fluid but
would require prohibitive amounts of power. Drilling is
required to emplace explosives for blasting of subsurface
ores to fragment it into manageable units. Such buried
explosives help to reduce the mechanical digging forces
required for excavation. For the Moon, specific explosive
charges of 0.04 kg/m3 of soft rock and 0.12 kg/m3 of hard
rock are required [22]. Rather than chemical blasting with
explosives, electrical blasting involves a fast discharge of
electrical energy at an electrode from a capacitor bank into a
small volume of electrolyte within rock. The electrolyte
turns into a high pressure plasma which generates
shockwaves in the rock. The keys to enhanced mining lie in
increased capabilities in efficient mechanical rock-breaking
mechanisms (mechanical rather than chemical explosives),
borehole drilling and other mining machines [23].

We propose a 3D printing suite as the centrepiece of the
rover payload based on fused deposition modelling (for
silicone plastic and ceramic/glass precursors) (such as a
RepRap derivative [30], electron beam freeform fabrication
(for iron, nickel, cobalt, silicon, tungsten, selenium, and
possibly aluminium/magnesium) [31] and Fresnel lensbased sinterer/melter (for ceramic processing) supplemented
by integrated milling. 3D printing introduces the notion that
subtractive processes can be reduced (but not eliminated
entirely). 3D printed moulds retain the capacity for rapid
casting of numbers of parts. Electron beam fabrication is
selected over laser fabrication to eliminate difficulties in
replicating a laser.

We envisage a mobile factory system of around 10 tonnes
with a robust traction system (such as the elastic loop
mobility system [24, 25] which eliminates the need for
paving robots. Furthermore, a tracked chassis provides high
traction against reaction forces imposed on the rover by
excavation devices. The Kapvik rover represents a very
modest step towards such a rover with its reconfigurable
chassis design, combined camera mast/soil scoop and
sample canisters (Fig 1).

Although assembly is minimised through 3D printing, a
revolute manipulator may perform compliant assembly with
special consideration on latching/joining mechanisms (such
as the remote centre compliance mechanism [32]. The rover
assembly payload may be configured into a reconfigurable
workcell built around standard component modules –
actuators/sensors, kinematic connectors, tooling and fixtures
4

– that may be assembled into robotic machines with specific
geometries for desired tasks [33]. The workcell may
comprise a 7 DOF serial manipulator to pick and place a
workpiece (assembly task) and a 6 DOF parallel
manipulator to machine the workpiece linked by a 1 DOF
linear conveyor between them. Tooling can be interchanged
through standardise interfaces.

Neural nets are ideally suited to learning the relationship
between input manufacturing parameters such as depth of
cut (d), feed rate (f), cutting velocity (v) and workpiece
dimensions (D) and output manufacturing parameters such
as cutting force (F), power consumption (P), temperature
(T) and workpiece surface finish (r) [42]. Neurofuzzy
approaches permit the use of both symbolic and
subsymbolic techniques. In order to maintain system
functionality, state measurements and estimation must be
implemented using multi-sensor systems (pressure,
temperature, forces, stiffness, vibration and wear) [43].
Most sensory feedback during manufacture of products is
based on X-ray fluorescence and/or ultrasound to detect
defects but simple displacement and force sensing can yield
useful feedback to measure perturbations such as thermal
deformations, mechanical deformations, tool wear and
vibration chattering during machining. Product quality
requires precision machining for good surface finish and
measurement for closed loop control of tool forces. An
alternative approach involves reduced intricacy in sensing
and control (RISC) which advocates minimal arrays of
optical sensors for local sensing, simple parallel jaw
grippers, passive remote centre compliance and
environmental fixtures for complex manufacturing
operations [44]. The key is the decomposition of complex
operations into multiple simple robotic operations. Petri net
can decompose complex scheduling problem into more
tractable subproblems: PN=(P,T,I,O,M,K) where P=set of
places, T=set of state transitions, P  T ≠ φ, P  T = φ, I:P
 T→N={0,1,2,…}, O:P  T→N, M:P→N, K:P→N. The
ultimate goal is to replace sensors by constraining motion
through friction using a tightly structured environment [45].
It is not currently clear how far such sensorless approaches
can ease AI complexity but a combination suggests an
effective approach. Having presented a brief plausibility
argument, we do not address these AI aspects further here.

The issue of closure of materials, energy and information is
essential to ensure that self-replication can occur - the
machine must mine, process, fabricate and assemble every
material, part and system from which it is constituted [34].
It was envisaged that certain complex or exotic parts could
be exempted and supplied as “vitamins” from Earth –
electronics, instruments, motors, etc. Our approach to solve
the closure problem is to (i) minimise the number of
materials and extraction complexity required; (ii) implement
generic processing (FFC Cambridge process) and
manufacturing (3D printing) techniques to minimise
machinery; (iii) demonstrate universal construction through
3D printing of mechatronic components (electric motors,
sensors and neural network hardware) [35]; (vi) to build the
self-replicator from the ground up based on function
through simplicity (rather than optimisation) and subject to
the constraints of the lunar environment.
Large environmental variances such as those encountered by
robots engaged in mining and manufacturing require
behavioural flexibility typically associated with AI
capacities. A few short years ago, this would have been
considered the weakest aspect of any robotic lunar system.
Today, however, AI has, after many years of lying fallow,
been spurred by developments in deep learning systems
with applications in robotic mining and lights-out
manufacturing, amongst others. The central task in
manufacturing is planning of manufacturing task schedules
and sequences. This may be treated as a search problem but
it is NP hard so knowledge must be exploited. An assembly
plan comprises a sequence of tasks subject to geometric
constraints – it comprises an NP-complete problem but a
range of constraints can drastically reduce the options [36].
A traditional expert system-based AI applied to automated
manufacturing is one approach [37] such as the adoption of
frames as objects organised in a semantic network [38].

4. IN-SITU RESOURCES
We take the view that any kinematic machine (or robot) is a
configuration of motors – be it a rover vehicle, manipulator,
drill, excavator, 3D printer, milling machine, etc.
Manufacture of the motor is the core of the self-replication
process. In order to fabricate structures, motors and
electronics, we have devised a minimal list of functional
materials that can be extracted from the Moon or its NiFe
meteoritic inventory (Table 2). It is worth noting that on
Earth, Pt group metals are mined from ores with only 7 ppm
metal and these materials have similar or greater
concentrations on the Moon.

Soft computing methods such as neural networks and other
methods are also applicable [39]. Neural networks have
been applied to many areas of manufacturing by virtue of
their adaptability and robustness [40]. Elman recurrent
neural networks have been used to implement a sequential
controller for automated manufacturing [41]. This
demonstrates that neural networks can implement causal
relationships in a process plan. It is their learning ability that
offers potential advantages over knowledge-based expert
systems for intelligent manufacturing required in
reconfigurable systems. Their applications cover almost all
manufacturing domains including design, process planning,
scheduling, process modelling and control, monitoring and
diagnosis, quality assurance and robotic control systems.

Table 2. Minimal set of functional lunar-derived
materials

5

Functionality

Lunar-Derived
Material

Tensile structures

Wrought iron

Substitution of steel by aluminum and plastic on Earth is not
necessary on the Moon, but the FFC Cambridge process
offers the capability of a wide range of metals from mineral
oxides. We wish to implement an industrial ecosystem in
which the consumption of materials and energy is optimized
by minimising waste, and the waste of one process becomes
the raw material for other processes. Minimisation of waste
is also a Toyota production system philosophy that seeks to
maximise return on investment. Minimisation of
consumption is the key to developing a self-sustained
industry of which a self-replicating machine is an exemplar.
Recycling is an attempt towards this though recycling
requires energy input and is never 100% efficient [46]. The
self-replicating machine provides such a 100% recycling
capability through the construction of its daughter products
(itself a form of self-repair).

Compressive structures Cast iron
Elastic structures

Steel springs/flexures
Silicone elastomers

Hard structures

Alumina

Thermal
conductor Fernico (e.g. kovar)
straps
Nickel
Thermal insulation
Glass (SiO2 fibre)
Ceramics such as SiO2
High thermal tolerance

Tungsten
Alumina
Electrical conduction Fernico (e.g. kovar)
wire
Nickel
Electrical insulation
Glass
Ceramics
(SiO2,
Al2O3and TiO2)
Silicone plastics
Silicon steel for motors

5.
3D
PRINTING
CONSTRUCTION

Ferrite
Silicon steel
Permalloy

Sensory transducers

Resistance wire
Quartz
Selenium

Optical structures

Polished nickel
Fused silica glass

Lubricants

Silicone oils
Water

Combustible fuels

Oxygen
Hydrogen

UNIVERSAL

We briefly review 3D printing techniques to assess their
suitability for extraterrestrial deployment (though we do not
consider issues invoked by partial gravity on planetary
surfaces). One of the most important issues concerns the use
of organic binder which may require a complex
manufacturing process necessitating its import from Earth.
Although Earth-imported reagents that are recycled may be
tolerated, consumption of Earth-imported materials into
products is not. Furthermore, in terms of a self-replicating
machine, re-use of the same device for multiple purposes
provides an efficiency of both material and manufacturing
processes – in particular, we focus on vacuum tube-derived
technology based on the electron gun. Conventional
subtractive manufacturing involves removing material from
a stock – it may be by machining, laser, electric discharge,
etc. Prior to the spread of additive manufacturing, material
cutting was the principal operation in 86% of flexible
manufacturing system (FMS) operations. CNC machining is
an example of subtractive manufacturing which employs a 3
or 5 DOF manipulator with tooling and supported by
fixtures. Subtractive manufacturing processes are highly
reliant on electric motors to drive hard tools to perform
drilling, milling, sawing and laser/electron beams.
Conventional forming processes are also highly reliant on
electric motors. Material joining is reliant on thermal energy
sources like electric arcs, burning gases and laser/electron
beams.

Active
electronics Kovar
devices (vacuum tubes) Nickel
Tungsten
Fused silica glass
Magnetic materials

AS

Additive manufacturing (henceforth synonymous with 3D
printing) is enabled through the digital STL file format
which permits slicing of the CAD model into a series of
cross sectional layers of arbitrary thickness for direct
manufacture through CAM. 3D printing introduces new
capabilities – it can fabricate parts with a wide range of
complex geometries without the tooling, fixtures, jigs and
moulds that characterise subtractive manufacturing methods
and with fewer manufacturing steps [47]. This is unlike
subtractive manufacturing which requires multiple process
tools such as casting, machining, welding etc. Furthermore,
6

fewer components for assembly yield materially more
efficient structures by minimising joinery and unnecessary
material with mass savings of 40-90%. Additive
manufacturing offers the potential for enormous savings
globally by eliminating material waste (swarf, etc) with
associated reductions in greenhouse gas emissions [48].
Excess material is readily recycled at the source. It enables
simplification of structural design and fewer parts count by
integrating parts, i.e. minimising material, shape and
functional complexity [49]. In terms of sustainability, a high
degree of recycling at product end-of-lifecycle is
conceivable. The reconfigurability of 3D printed products
offer advantages of distributed manufacturing close to point
of demand with digital design files transported
electronically, i.e. reduce physical transport if the material
source is widespread [50] - manufacturer and consumer are
merging into the same agent. This has been pioneered by the
Fab@Home factory system and the RepRap 3D printer
which could conceivably develop beyond the enthusiast or
hobbyist [51]. All cases of 3D printing involve a Cartesian
robot configuration in which a deposition head is moved in
a 2D planar pattern that outlines the layer geometry, and a
work platform which is moved in the vertical direction to
permit consecutive layer upon layer construction. Hence,
like subtractive manufacturing, it is also reliant on electric
motors, thermal heating and laser/electron beams. There are
several major approaches to 3D printing.

layer. It is thus a combination of additive (layering) and
subtractive (laser cutting) manufacturing techniques.
However, LOM layers are subject to warping in the zdirection. Ultrasonic consolidation can 3D print multimaterial metal parts from dissimilar metal foils such as
aluminum, steel and inconel with embedded ceramic fibres
with high internal bonding integrity [52, 53]. It requires a
post-process milling stage which may be integrated into the
additive manufacturing device. The layering in LOM
requires prefabricated sheet feedstock with a complex
assembly process which excludes it from further
consideration for extraterrestrial use.
Fused deposition manufacturing (FDM) melts a thin
filament of thermoplastic which feeds into an extrusion head
which deposits a thin layer of plastic onto a substrate. The
plastic is heated to 1oC above its melting point in the
extrusion head so that it solidifies rapidly after extrusion to
form 50-250 μm layers. Each layer is deposited
consecutively to build the 3D part. Due to cold welds
between layers, delamination can occur if the temperature
fluctuates. The most commonly used thermoplastics are
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), polylactic acid
(PLA), nylon and more recently silicone plastics (siloxanes).
FDM is a 3D printing technique that offers versatility
despite being restricted to plastics. Its application to silicone
plastics is of particular value for extraterrestrial employment
as siloxanes are radiation resistant and have wide
temperature tolerance.

Stereolithography (SLA) was the first 3D printing technique
developed by Chuck Hall in the 1980s to exploit digital
CAD models. It is based on layer-by-layer construction of a
photosensitive resin (such as CibatoolR SL 5170 resin) using
UV light. A low power UV laser is directed onto a thin layer
on the surface of a vat of liquid photosensitive polymer to
polymerise it by cross-linking into a solid resin layer. The
UV laser spot is controlled by mirrors to trace out the
desired cross sectional pattern on the liquid photopolymer
which hardens into a solid on exposure to UV. The platform
mounting the part is depressed to submerge the solidified
layer until a layer-thickness of liquid resin covers the solid
layer. This liquid layer is then subjected to another cycle of
UV laser treatment. UV light repeatedly solidifies thin
layers so that a 3D part of resin is constructed layer-bylayer. It can achieve high resolution layering ~5-20 μm and
a horizontal precision of ~1-10 μm. Such high resolution is
achievable because it does not create a melt pool unlike
most other 3D printing processes. It does require support
structures for overhangs which are subsequently removed
from the finished part. SLA is limited in the material
choices (UV photopolymers) available. It is not considered
suitable for extraterrestrial use due to its material
limitations.

Of particular interest with respect to FDM are preceramic
polymers which include silicone-based polysiloxanes [54].
The high melting point of most ceramics makes their direct
casting and 3D printing very difficult at best. Furthermore,
their high brittleness renders them prone to thermal cracking
if large thermal gradients exist. Pyrolysis of polysiloxanes
such as PDMS at 350-1000oC or above can yield highly
quality SiO2 films with the evolution of CO2. This permits
thermal preforming of the polymer prior to its conversion to
ceramic which then has an ultrahigh temperature tolerance
up to 1600oC. Above 1400oC, silica forms its high
temperature
crystabolite
form
which
exhibits
piezoresistivity. Iron-containing polymer-derived ceramics
can form ceramics with magnetic properties. Combining
siloxanes (Si-O-Si) with silazanes (Si-N-Si) results in
SiOCN ceramics after pyrolysis at 1000oC in a noble gas
environment [55]. The requirement for thin thickness under
3 mm dictates the employment of lattice and honeycomb
structures capable of surviving high temperatures. The
application of UV radiation in the presence of oxygen
(forming ozone) can potentially reduce polysiloxanes such
as PDMS to silica at room-temperature [56]. This process is
limited to a surface film of 20-30 nm with potential
applications in microelectronics. The UV-exposed layer can
be 30-100 μm which is compatible with 3D printing layers.
On the Moon and Mars, ambient solar UV flux can be
exploited in this manner to create ceramics from siloxanes
after 3D printing at low temperature.

Laminated object manufacturing (LOM) bonds thin solid
sheets of paper, metals, plastic or composite coated in a
thermal adhesive under pressure and heat. A laser cuts the
material of each layer to the desired cross sectional shape.
The laser focus and velocity is controlled for depth to ensure
that only one layer is cut. This process proceeds layer-by7

Inkjet 3D printing is derived from dot-matrix printing – a
solute is dissolved in a liquid solvent (ink) and the solution
is sprayed through a nozzle. It deposits liquid droplets of a
polymer binder (ink) over a powder bed of particles (usually
metal or ceramic) to form a composite layer of the desired
shape. The ink dries through evaporation of the solvent to
bind the particles into a solid horizontal patterned layer. A
new layer of particles is then deposited over the hardened
layer followed by the liquid binder. The viscosity, inertia
and surface tension of the ink determines the droplet
behaviour as represented by the Reynolds number Re (ratio
of inertial to viscous forces), Weber number We (ratio of
kinetic to surface energy) and Ohnesorge number Oh
(relative importance of viscous to surface forces):
We
Oh  Re


dv

where Re   , We 


 d

[58]. Powder bed fusion offers superior tolerance and finish
while wire feed offers rapid deposition rate. There is a
correlation between microstructure, processing parameters
and materials properties – the microstructure of powdergenerated material is finer than that of wire-generated
material due to the larger melt pool and consequent slower
cooling of wire feeding. In powder bed fusion, a powder is
raked over the work area for subsequent thermal processing.
In powder feed, the powder is deployed from a nozzle with
gas onto the work area for subsequent thermal processing.
In wire feed, the energy source – laser beam, electron beam
or plasma arc – impinges on the wire to deposit molten
beads onto the work area. The optimal configuration for
superior surface finish is to position the wire at the leading
edge of the melt pool through front feeding. In terms of
power delivery, there are three main thermal power sources
– selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/M techniques
pioneered by EOS and Renishaw respectively), electron
beam melting (EBM pioneered by ARCAM) and arc
welding. They are all selective sintering/melting methods
that impose a localised heat source on the material.

(1)

dv 2
 , v=fluid velocity, η=dynamic

viscosity, d=droplet diameter, ρ=fluid density, σ=surface
tension. If Oh>1, nozzle clogging will occur; if Oh<0.1,
multiple droplets will result. The jetting condition is thus
1<Oh<0.1. Inkjet 3D printing can bind most types of
powder but it offers limited parts density. The requirement
for an imported binder renders it unsuitable for
extraterrestrial use.

Welding is a joining process which melts base metal for
fusion supplemented by a filler metal (as opposed to
soldering and brazing which melt another metal at lower
temperature). There are several common forms of welding
but the three most appropriate for extraterrestrial
deployment include: (i) oxyacetylene welding uses
acetylene fuel ignited in oxygen to weld and cut metal
(acetylene may be manufactured readily from Martian
resources); (ii) TIG (tungsten inert gas) welding uses a
tungsten electrode to generate an electric arc and an Ar/He
shielding gas to weld; (iii) special welding techniques for
high energy density, deep welding including laser beam
welding (in air or in vacuo) and electron beam welding (in
vacuo). The TIG welding torch employs tungsten electrodes
in common with vacuum tube devices (see later). We do not
consider welding further here other than to note that pairing
of electron beam welding with electron beam additive
manufacturing (both based on vacuum tube-based devices)
and laser beam welding with selective laser
sintering/melting offer combined additive and subtractive
techniques.

Prometal 3D printing is a variation on inkjet 3D printing in
which a powdered metal, ceramic or composite (most
commonly steel particles) is deposited onto a substrate
followed by spraying with a binder from a nozzle tracing the
desired cross sectional pattern. After the 3D part has been
constructed layer-by-layer, it is fired at elevated temperature
~170-180oC for 24 h to strengthen the binding to yield a
40% porous 3D part. The part may then be infused with
bronze powder at 1100oC to form an alloy of 60% steel and
40% bronze for near full densification. Tungsten carbide
particles sintered with zirconium copper have been 3D
printed into rocket nozzles using this technique. The
previous argument applies.
Multiphase jet solidification uses low melting point alloys
(such as tin-bismuth with a melting point of 180oC) or
ceramic powder-polymer binder (typically in a 50%:50%
ratio) paste which is forced from a nozzle to create parts
layer-by-layer [57]. The polymer binder impregnated by
ceramic particles may be heated and extruded under low
viscosity flow to sequentially build each layer which is
cooled before the next layer is applied. Stainless (316L)
steel powder may similarly mixed with the polymer binder
to extrude at low temperature but evaporation of the binder
results in 30% volume shrinkage and the part still requires
subsequent high temperature sintering. The previous
argument applies.

In powder beds, the commonest approach to metal additive
manufacturing, the laser or electron beam selectively
thermally fuses a pattern on the powder bed layer-by-layer,
yielding fully dense metal components with relatively high
precision [59]. The powder bed is maintained in an inert gas
environment such as Ar (for laser) or vacuum ~10 -4-10-5
mbar (for electron beam) environment in an enclosed
chamber. The laser or electron beam scans over the powder
bed to sinter or melt the particles in a 2D cross section
pattern. Conductive heat flow from a rapid scanning laser or
electron beam onto a solid material is determined by [60]:

Most work to date on metal additive manufacturing has been
focussed on Ti6Al4V though many alloys can be employed.
For metal 3D printing, there are three main approaches for
inputting metal – powder bed, powder feed and wire feed

T
x

8

 D 2T  cQp

(2)

where D=thermal diffusivity, cp=specific heat/unit volume,
T=temperature, Q 

P( f )
2r 2 

printed offering higher strength, stiffness and stability than
traditional forging/machining methods.

=power density, P(f)=Gaussian

In selective laser melting (SLM), the powder bed is heated
just below the melting point of the material prior to melting
to minimise thermal distortions of the new melted layer with
the underlying solidified layer. The difference between laser
sintering and laser melting is that in the latter, the powder is
fully melted rather than partially as in the former. Melting of
the powder results in greater densification compared with
the small porosity from sintering but SLM still generally
benefits from hot isostatic pressing (HIP). Laser melting
permits processing of non-ferrous materials that are too
viscous (which causes balling) for sintering. SLM involves
high laser intensities delivering ~1010 W/m2 to the localised
workpiece. Laser energy density is given by:

beam power distribution function, r=beam spot radius,
x=material thickness, λ=absorption length (related to layer
thickness). Power density is determined by the beam energy
2
given by E  hf for the laser and E  12 mve for the
electron beam respectively. Rapid heating and cooling rates
of ~104 K/s at solid/liquid interface in the melt pool is
typical. Once the solidified layer is complete, the work
platform is depressed one layer thickness and a roller
spreads another layer of powder onto the solidified layer.
The unsintered powder of the underlying layer acts as
support for the overlying layer thereby permitting overhangs
without dedicated support structures. The process is
repeated layer-by-layer until the 3D part has been
constructed. The 3D part may be subjected to postprocessing procedures such as machining, shot peening, heat
treatment, hot isostatic pressing, etc.

DE  2r0Pv

where P=transmitted laser power, v=laser scanning speed,
r=laser spot radius. Ceramic processing requires high
temperatures in excess of 1700oC. In multicomponent
powder mixtures, the low melting point metal acts as binder
while the high melting point metal acts as the structural
component, typically with a small amount of additive to
prevent oxidation [61]. The processing temperature is
between the solidus and liquidus temperatures. Wetting of
the structural metal by the liquid binder may be defined by
the contact angle:

Selective laser sintering (SLS) uses a high powered laser
(usually CO2 laser) to sinter a bed of powdered polymer,
metal, ceramic or glass particles or combinations thereof
into a hardened solid. Solidification of powder occurs
without melting. In particular, steel, nickel, cobalt, inconel,
titanium, intermetallics, alumina, silica, zirconia, PZT and
PEEK are commonly printed using SLS. SLS focusses a
laser to sequentially sinter layers of fine powder into
patterns traced out by the laser. After each layer is sintered,
a fresh layer of powder is rolled sequentially onto the
powder bed. The residual stress is dependent on the material
(especially coefficient of thermal expansion and elastic
modulus), part height and laser processing conditions
(including tool path). The major laser processing parameters
are laser power P, scan speed v, beam size, hatch distance h
between laser tracks and powder layer thickness d. Laserbased deposition thickness for a Gaussian beam profile is
given by:

h

R0 rt 

 r  2 ( vt )

 

cos   sv lv sl

(6)

where γ=surface tension between solid-liquid, solid-vapour
and liquid-vapour interfaces. As cosθ→1, wetting increases.
Viscosity of the molten material is given by:



  0 1  1
m

l



2

(7)

where μ0=base viscosity, φl=volume fraction of liquid,
φm=critical volume fraction of solid above which viscosity
is infinite. Heterogeneity in alloy mixtures can result
requiring post-processing such as hot isostatic pressing.
Despite its promise for multi-material additive
manufacturing, we discard SLS/SLM techniques for
extraterrestrial deployment for two reasons: (i) metal
powders under partial gravity and vacuum conditions are
difficult to control; (ii) lasers have poor energy conversion
efficiencies.

(3)

where r=laser spot radius, R0=diffusion-limited axial growth
rate, v=scanning speed, t=process time. The effects of laser
parameters are integrated into the volumetric energy density
factor (kJ/mm3):
P
VED  vhd

(5)

(4)

The sintering laser is typical 200-1000 W for metals and
must deliver < 10 MW/cm2 for optimal processing. Laser
AM can print with 20-50 μm thick layers depending on the
powder size (which determines the stair stepping effect),
dimensional accuracy of ±50 μm and a surface roughness of
~10-15 μm. Sintered parts are near fully dense but laser
scanning is slow with a build rate of 5-20 cm3/h but multiple
sets of lasers can increase this rate. Glass/carbon/metal fibre
reinforced composites with plastic or metal matrices (such
as steel, Ti alloys, and Ni-Co super-alloys) may be 3D

Electron beam melting (EBM) is similar to SLM except that
an electron beam replaces the laser, offering higher energy
efficiency of 10-20% compared with the 2-5% efficiency of
laser beams – this will be critical for extraterrestrial
deployment. EBM can be powder or wire fed [62]. It can
interact with many metal alloys including Ti, Al, steel,
copper, Be, Co and Inconel alloys but cannot process
electrical insulators. In mixed particles, melting
temperatures range considerably from 1300 oC for Inconel to
9

2500oC for Nb which affects pre-heat scanning strategies
and melt scan beam currents. A heated tungsten cathode
emits electrons that are focussed with two magnetic fields
generated by the focus coil which acts a magnetic lens to
focus the beam onto the powder bed ~0.01 mm diameter and
the deflection coil which scans the beam over the powder
bed. The electrons interact with the metal particles and melt
them. The layer thickness is typically 50-200 μm. EBM is
typically performed in two stages: (i) preheating stage
preheats the powder bed with multiple passes at high
scanning speed up to 40-60% melting temperature (700900oC typically) to reduce thermal gradients and consequent
residual stresses between layers; (ii) melting stage at low
scanning speed to melt the powder. The main electron beam
processing parameters are beam power, current, focus
diameter, pre-heat temperature and layer thickness. For the
electron beam, temperature of the bed is given by:

T ~ Q(1cp xR )
where

The chief problems in 3D printing have been in process
control for high gradient thermal cycles and their effects on
mechanical properties, and higher dimensional accuracy for
reduced surface roughness. It is the lack of quality assurance
by monitoring process control in additive manufacturing
that has hampered surface roughness and other deficiencies
in the build – feedback loops with adequate sensors is
essential [65]. Stair-stepping between layers is determined
by the layer resolution which is determined by process
control. Balling occurs when the melt forms spheres that
exceed the layer thickness resulting in non-uniform material
distribution. Balling may be reduced at heat inputs of 14001700 J/mm3. A feedback system can provide closed loop
control of dimension during deposition using sensors to
extract melt pool information and adjusting input processing
parameters. In melting, Marangoni convection driven by
surface temperature gradients of the melt pool affects the
quality of the melt pool [66]. Camera imaging of the melt
pool can detect imperfections and measure dimensional
inaccuracies. In particular, accurate distance measurements
are required – photodiode sensors and/or electromagnetic
sensors are ideal. Temperature gradients may be identified
by pyrometers or infrared cameras protected by ZnSe
window. However, the range and mix of sensors may be
much enhanced (such as X-ray spectroscopy) especially
with data fusion. Integration of sensors, software and
communications is required for seamless autonomous
control of industrial machines and processes. However,
these approaches are still in developmental stages though
they show much promise.

(8)

Q  IVv =beam power density, R=reflectivity,

ρ=material density, v=scan speed. Typical electron beam
power is ~3 kW at 30-60 kV. EBM has a higher build rate
of 100-2500 cm3/h but poorer surface finish than SLM.
Within EBM manufacturing, measurements may be made
by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) configuration.
The SEM comprises an electron gun to generate an electron
beam, a set of magnetic lenses to focus the beam and a focus
platform, all encased in a high vacuum. Electron beam
additive manufacturing, despite being limited only to
metals, is a versatile technique based on vacuum tube-type
technology.

6. 3D PRINTING ELECTRIC MOTORS
Whereas the 1980 NASA study considered that electric
motors and electronics are complex and should be imported
from Earth, Chirikjian et al (2002) suggested that electric
motors might be assembled from cast components in-situ
[67]. Furthermore, electromechanical relays operate on a
similar principle and using similar components as electric
motors. A
network of manufacturing tools (cyclic
fabrication) – laser machining, assembly, casting, hot wax
vacuuming and electroforming - has demonstrated the
fabrication of a brush “air” DC motor from polyurethane,
silicone resin moulds, sacrificial wax moulds, solder alloys,
and metal salt solutions of copper and nickel [68]. The
motor comprised 15 cast plastic parts (6 coil plates, 7
magnet disks, 1 commutator shaft, 1 baseplate), 4 cast
Rose’s metal commutator rings, 8 brass brushes, 6 magnetic
steel yoke pieces, 42 NdFeB magnets and extruded Rose’s
metal wires. The motor was complex in construction and
required complex machinery to fabricate.

Directed energy deposition methods of 3D printing
(pioneered by 3D Systems) involve melting of material as it
is being deposited. An example is laser engineering net
shaping (LENS pioneered by Optomec) which uses a high
power laser (500 W – 5 kW) to sinter or melt metal powder
particles which form consecutive layers vertically on a
substrate build a 3D part. It requires the part to be cut from
the substrate and requires post-processing. It is a variant on
the SLM technique so the same criticisms apply.
Amorphous ceramic structures have been fabricated using
additive LENS from lunar regolith simulant (primarily
plagioclase with supplementary olivine and pyroxene
particles of 50-150 μm) [63]. The process parameters were
laser power of 50 W (laser spot size of 1.65 mm giving an
energy density of 2 J/mm2), scan speed of 20 mm/s and
powder feed rate of 12.4 g/min. The printed glassy material
had a hardness of 500 Hv similar to soda lime glass (550
Hv) using those parameters. This demonstrates the viability
of 3D printing of lunar regolith for habitat and other
structures as an alternative to lunar contour crafting and 3Dshape which both use a large extrusion nozzle to lay a
viscous mixture of concrete and regolith/binder respectively
[64].

The approach we are exploring is to vastly simplify electric
motor construction through 3D printing using more robust
materials. We have been striving towards 3D printing
electric motors [69, 70] as a corollary to the theorem that 3D
printing supplemented with milling constitutes an universal
construction mechanism. We have made progress in 3D
10

printing DC electric motors including rotor core, coils and
stators. This has involved 3D printing in metals and plastic.
The motor core comprises magnetically soft material
(silicon steel) powder impregnating an insulating resin
binder of PLA has been 3D printed by FDM (Fig 2).

Fig 4.Unsuccessful electromagnetic stator

7. 3D PRINTABLE ELECTRONICS

Fig 2. 3D printed iron-impregnated PLA-based rotor for a
DC motor

Data processing and expert system functions to support selfreplication is based on neural network architectures to
implement AI capabilities [71] supplemented with offline
training through deep learning [72]. This includes a neural
SLAM capability [73] which eliminates the need for a
transponder network.

We have photolithographically printed the electrical coils in
a pancake motor test configuration which has successfully
demonstrated the elimination of wire windings (Fig 3).
Photolithography is of course a variation on
stereolithographic 3D printing. We are in the process of
integrating the two elements – 3D printed rotor and
lithographically printed coils – into a hybrid fully-printed
rotor.

We have been tackling the 3D printed electronics aspect
from two directions. We have demonstrated the deposition
of molten aluminum alloy strips directly onto silicone
plastic substrates to demonstrate integrated multi-material
compatibility (Fig 5).

Fig 3. Photolithographically-printed coils
We have also 3D printed electromagnetic iron alloy (by
SLM) for the stator magnets with mixed success (Fig 4).
Unfortunately, the stator field was only 3 G which was
insufficient to generate torque on the rotor even with 900
turns of wire on the stator. However, we are exploring the
use of a series of permanent magnet solutions – alnico,
samarium-cobalt and rare earth alloys – to be 3D printed
using EBM. Once the stator magnets have been successful,
we shall integrate all three components into a fully 3D
printed DC motor.
Fig 5. Aluminium track on silicone plastic substrate
With further development, we will be able to print passive
RC circuits. In our custom-made 3D printer, we shall utilise
a modular motor unit to drive a rack-and-pinion in all three
axes to form a Cartesian robot assembly. This bears
11

resemblance to the “modular production system” concept
which comprised of two orthogonal horizontal modular
prismatic links mounting a boring drill to a workpiece on a
table actuated by a vertical prismatic link [74].

achieved, 3D printing of motors has almost been
demonstrated but 3D printing of active electronics is less
well developed.

APPENDIX: TURING MACHINES
Our approach to computing with active devices however is
based on vacuum tubes as the basis for hardware neuron
circuits [75]. There is a complex trade-off between simple
distributed electronics and microprocessor electronics
whereby increased subsystems of reduced complexity
enhance survivability in more complex environments [76].
This corroborates our approach to use distributed sets of
neural network circuits rather than a centralised von
Neumann architecture. We have been examining the use of
analogue hardware neural network circuits as a new
approach to computing (Fig 6).

Primitive recursive functions are a class of functions that
may be computed mechanically, i.e. computable functions.
A computable function may be defined as an algorithm
(program) of a finite number of steps composed of a finite
sequence of symbols from a finite alphabet of symbols but
of arbitrary complexity. Computable functions may also be
defined as those that are computable by a Turing machine.
These are all equivalent definitions of computable functions.
The last definition is a statement of the Church-Turing
thesis which states that any computation can be performed
by a Turing machine. A computable number is one that can
be computed by a finite, halting algorithm, i.e. computable
by a Turing machine. Computable numbers include all
algebraic numbers and many transcendental numbers such
as π and e. For any Turing machine, it is possible to
construct an equivalent Boolean circuit that implements all
its computations because Boolean circuits are equivalent to
formulas of propositional calculus.

Fig 6. Analogue neuron circuit
The Turing machine is a machine that encapsulates notion
of the algorithm as a well-defined finite procedure of
sequential steps that transform an input into an output. The
Church-Turing thesis defines computation as a
mathematically precise process embodied in the Turing
machine. A Turing machine comprises three parts: (i) an
infinitely long digital tape divided into consecutive cells
containing symbols 0 or 1 – this is the stored program, and
(ii) a finite state machine (movable read-write head) with q
states that reads the tape as a sequence of inputs one cell at a
time in either direction initiated from a start state q 0 and
writes a new output sequence on the tape; (iii) a set of
transition rules (program) that determines the next state of
the read/write head. As the tape is read from and written to,
the finite state machine alters its internal state. As an
automaton, the Turing machine may be described by:
M=(Q.q0,qf, A,B,T, δ) where Q=set of states, q0=initial
state, qf=final state, A=finite alphabet of input symbols,
B=special blank symbol, T=finite alphabet of tape symbols,
δ=transition function such that δxT→QxTx{L,R}, L=move
left, R=move right. The read write/head reads the an input
symbol on the tape, overwrites the input symbol on the tape
with the output symbol, and moves left or right to the next
symbol. The sequence of transitions constitutes the
computation. Often, the Turing machine concept has
multiple tapes but they can be simulated by a single tape
Turing machine. The tape may be likened to mRNA with
each cell of the tape representing a codon. The transition
function has been likened to biological translation
represented by aminoacyl-tRNA pairing. The Turing
machine computes a finite sequence of symbols until it
reaches its halting state such that Y=M(I) where Y=output
string, I=input string, M=Turing machine. The
computational automaton as a whole represents a ribosome.

We have demonstrated the efficacy of this neuron circuit on
a desktop rover which used a two-neuron circuit to
implement simple obstacle avoidance behaviour. The use of
analogue neural circuits is motivated by the adoption of
vacuum tubes as the core component of active electronics.
Unlike solid state circuits, vacuum tubes can be constructed
from lunar resources – glass, tungsten, nickel and kovar.
There may be limits to their miniaturisation on the Moon, so
neural net architectures offer logarithmic footprint growth
with task complexity over the exponential growth implicit in
traditional von Neumann architectures and their variants.
We have yet to 3D print vacuum tubes but have
demonstrated analogue hardware neural circuits controlling
a desktop test rover. We are in fact exploring 3D printing of
a magnetron as a macroscopic vacuum tube but this work is
in its early stages. Nevertheless, this approach implements a
direct implementation of the original Turing machine
concept in which the read/write head is implemented as a
3D printing machine which outputs (prints) the neural
circuit (computer program) to be implemented (see
Appendix A for Turing machine tutorial).

8. CONCLUSIONS
The prospect of a self-replicating machine to develop and
exploit extraterrestrial environments remains a significant
challenge. Nevertheless, the first tentative steps have been
taken and a solution and an implicit technological roadmap
is visible. The lunar materials required that impose the
ultimate constraints are understood. Core capabilities
include 3D printing of electric motors and electronics as the
key 3D printing of entire robotic machines including 3D
printers (universal constructors) and other supporting
kinematic machines. Although this initial goal has yet to be
12

There are several variations on the Turing machine. The
Bernoulli-Turing machine is a deterministic Turing machine
augmented by an information source modelled as heat bath.

advance whether a particular program will halt with a
computed output – the unsolvability of the halting problem
denies the existence of any general algorithm that can
determine whether a given computation will halt or not, i.e.
this halting problem is undecidable. For example, a search
for a counterexample to disprove Goldbach’s conjecture
(that every even number greater than 2 is expressible as the
sum of two primes) will find a counterexample if it exists
but will continue forever if it does not.

The universal Turing machine (UTM) is a general Turing
machine that can simulate any other Turing machine given
the description of that Turing machine as an input on its
tape. It can be an even more complex Turing machine at the
cost of a fixed overhead to the program size and a
polynomial decrease in computation speed. An important
consideration is computational tractability. Computational
complexity of an algorithm is defined as the time required
for its computation on a Turing machine. The class of
decision problems that can be solved by a Turing machine
in polynomial time constitutes class P; PSPACE are
problems that can be solved by a Turing machine with
polynomial storage capability but may require exponential
time; those that can be solved by a non-deterministic
(probabilistic) Turing machine in polynomial time
constitutes class NP. Soluble problems P are those soluble
in polynomial time while problems NP are soluble in
exponential time are considered to be insoluble (in a
practical not theoretical sense) [77]. It is widely expected
that PSPACE≠P. Similarly, it is known that P  NP but it is
not known if P=NP but it is suspected that P≠NP. If,
however, a single problem can be found in class NP that is
also in P, then P=NP would be proven.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author thanks the National Science & Engineering
Research Council for part funding this project.

REFERENCES
[1] Ellery A (2016) “Solar power satellites for clean energy
enabled through disruptive technologies” Proc 23rd World
Energy Congress (Award Winning Papers), Istanbul,
Turkey, 133-147
[2] Lewis-Weber J (2016) “Lunar-based self-replicating solar
factory” New Space J 4 (1), 53-61
[3] Ellery A (2017) “Space exploration through selfreplication technology compensates for discounting in net
present value cost-benefit analysis” New Space J 5 (3),
141-154

There are many universal Turing machine concepts
including small Turing machines such as the Minsky
machine (with a 7-state read/write head and 4 symbol
alphabet) and the one-dimensional cellular automaton Rule
110 [78]. At a hardware level, the UTM has to re-arrange its
internal structure of switches to implement different
algorithms. This introduces the key notion of a software
algorithm differentiated from the underlying hardware. The
modern computer, by virtue of its reprogrammability, is a
universal Turing machine. In a von Neumann computational
architecture, data is read and written by a central processing
unit (CPU) by fetching data to and from memory. Similarly,
a dynamical system is computationally universal if it can be
programmed to perform any digital computation [79].
Computation may be represented as ordinary differential
equations of the form dx
dt  f (x ) which converge to

[4] Cho A (2007) “Making machines that make others of
their kind” Science 318, 1084-1085
[5] von Neumann J and Burks A (1966) Theory of SelfReproducing Automata, University of Illinois Press,
Champaign, Ill
[6] Stevens W (2009) “Parts closure in a kinematic selfreplicating programmable constructor” Artificial Life &
Robotics 13 (2), 508-511
[7] Freitas R & Merkle R (2004) Kinematic Self-Replicating
Machines, Landes Bioscience, Texas
[8] Beuchat J-L & Haenni J-O (2000) “von Neumann’s 29state cellular automaton: a hardware implementation”
IEEE Trans Education 43 (3), 300-308

attractors (fixed points, limit cycles or chaotic attractors) as
their computational outputs, e.g. the Hopfield neural
networks relaxes to the solution of optimisation problems in
which the solution is that state which minimises a cost
function E by finding the local minimum from gradient flow
x  gradE [80]. Hence, the equivalence of dynamical
systems and Turing machines dictates that either can be
used to represent the other and that all cause/effect relations
can be expressed either through deductive logic or
numerical computation. Analogue neural networks represent
such dynamical systems.

[9] Freitas R and Gilbreath W, Advanced Automation for
Space Missions, NASA Conference Publication 2255,
Washington DC, 1980
[10] Chirikjian G, Zhou Y, Suthakorn J (2002) “Selfreplicating robots for lunar development” IEEE/ASME
Trans Mechatronics 7 (4), 462-472
[11] Sayama H (2002) “von Neumann’s machine in the
shell: enhancing the robustness of self-replication
process” Artificial Life VIII (eds. Standish, Abbas,
Bedau), MIT Press, 49-52

There are limits to the Turing machine – they suffer from
the halting problem whereby it is impossible to determine in
13

[12] Lee K, Chirikjian G (2007) “Robotic self-replication”
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (Dec), 34-43

experimental astrobiology” Int J Astrobiology 5 (3),
221-241

[13] Ellery A (2016) “Are self-replicating machines
feasible?” AIAA J Spacecraft & Rockets 53 (2), 317-327

[27] D. Andrews, A. Colaprete, J. Quinn, D. Chavers, M.
Picard, (2014) “Introducing the Resource Prospector
Mission” AIAA Space 2014 Conference & Exposition,
San Diego, California

[14] Bernold L (1994) “Cable-based lunar transportation
system” ASCE J Aerospace Engineering 7 (1), 1-16

[28] Ellery A, Lowing P, Wanjara P, Kirby M, Mellor I,
Doughty G (2017) “FFC Cambridge process with metal
3D printing as universal in-situ resource utilisation”
Proc Advanced Space Technology for Robotics &
Automation (ASTRA), Leiden, Holland

[15] Dunbabin M, Corke P, Winstanley G, Roberts J (2006)
“Off-world robotic excavation for large-scale habitat
construction and resource extraction” AAAI Spring Symp
To Boldly Go Where No Human-Robot Team Has Gone
Before, Technical Report SS-07-6, Stanford, CA
[16] Boles W, Ashley D, Tucker R (1993) “Lunar-base
construction equipment and methods evaluation” ASCE
J Aerospace Engineering 6, 217-235

[29] Taylor L, Schmitt H, Carrier III D, Nakagawa M
(2005) “Lunar dust problem: from liability to asset”
AIAA 1st Space Exploration Conf: Continuing the
Voyage of Discovery, Orlando FL, AIAA 2005-2510

[17] Johnson L & King R (2010) “Measurement of force to
excavate extraterrestrial regolith with a small bucketwheel excavator” J Terramechanics 47, 87-95

[30] Jones R, Haufe P, Sells E, Iravani P, Olliver V, Palmer
C, Bowyer A (2011) “RepRap – the replicating rapid
prototyper” Robotica 29 (Jan), 177-191

[18] Bland P, Artemieva N, Collins G, Bottke W, Bussey D,
Joy K (2008) “Asteroids on the Moon: projectile
survival during low velocity impacts” 39th Lunar &
Planetary Science Conf, abstract no 2045

[31] Taminger K & Hafley R (2006) “Electron beam
freeform fabrication (EBF3) for cost-effective near-net
shape manufacturing” NASA TM 2006-214284
[32] Ciblak N & Lipkin H (1996) “Remote centre of
compliance reconsidered” Proc ASME Design
Engineering Technical Conf & Computers in
Engineering Conf, Irvine, California, 1-20

[19] Ellery A (2017) “Self-replicating machines: from
theory to practice” Proc Planetary & Terrestrial Mining
Science Symp/Space Resources Roundtable, paper no
1661

[33] Chen I-M (2001) “Rapid response manufacturing
through a rapidly reconfigurable robotic workcell”
Robotics & Computer Integrated Manufacturing 17,
199-213

[20] Bar-Cohen Y et al (2001) “Ultrasonic/sonic
drilling/coring (USDC) for planetary application” Proc
SPIE 8th Annual Symposium on Smart Structures &
Materials, California, 4327-4355

[34] Freitas R & Zachary W (1981) “Self-replicating
growing lunar factory” Proc 5th Princeton/AIAA Conf
Space Manufacturing 4 (ed. Grey J & Hamdan L),
AIAA Inc

[21] Gao Y, Ellery A, Vincent J, Eckersley S, Jaddou M
(2007) “Planetary micro-penetrator concept study with
biomimetic drill and sampler design” IEEE Trans
Aerospace & Electronic Systems 43 (3), 875-885

[35] Ellery A (2016) “John von Neumann’s self-replicating
machine – critical components required” Proc IEEE Int
Conf Systems Man & Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary,
314-319

[22] Satish H, Radziszewski P, Ouellet J (2005) “Design
issues and challenges in lunar/Martian mining
applications” Mining Technology 114 (2), 107-117
[23] Nantel J (1996) “Improvements in mining technology”
Int Conf on Space Engineering, Construction &
Operations in Space V, Albuquerque, NM, 806-813

[36] Kunica Z, Vranjes B, Tomic I (2003) “Development of
s design procedure for automatic assembly systems”
Proc IEEE Int Symp Assembly & Task Planning, 295300

[24] Costes N, Trautwein,W (1973) "Elastic loop mobility
system - a new concept for planetary exploration" J
Terramechanics 10(1), 89-104

[37] Shukla C, Chen F (1996) “State of the art in intelligent
real-time FMS control: a comprehensive survey” J
Intelligent Manufacturing 7, 441-455

[25] A. Ellery (2005) “Robot-environment interaction - the
basis for mobility in planetary micro-rovers” Robotics &
Autonomous Systems 51, 29-39

[38] Lau H, Mak K (2001) “Extended unified framework for
the rapid development of automated manufacturing
systems” Mechatronics 11, 131-155

[26] A. Ellery & the Rover Team (2006) “ExoMars rover
and Pasteur payload Phase A study: an approach to

[39] Zareba M, Morel G (2003) “Integration and control of
14

intelligence in distributed manufacturing” J Intelligent
Manufacturing 14, 25-42

[53] Obielodan J, Stucker B (2014) “Fabrication
methodology for dual-material engineering structures
using ultrasonic additive manufacturing” Int J Advanced
Manufacturing Technology 70, 277-284

[40] Huang S & Zhang H-C (1994) “Artificial neural
networks in manufacturing: concepts, applications and
perspectives” IEEE Trans Components, Packaging &
Manufacturing Technology – Part A 17 (2), 212-228

[54] Colombo P, Mera G, Riedel R, Soraru D (2010)
“Polymer-derived ceramics: 40 years of research and
innovation in advanced ceramics” J American Ceramic
Society 93 (7), 1805-1837

[41] Abdelhameed M & Tolbah F (2002) “Recurrent neural
network-based sequential controller for manufacturing
automated systems” Mechatronics 12, 617-633

[55] Eckel Z, Zhou C, Martin J, Jacobsen A, Carter W,
Schaedler T (2016) “Additive manufacturing of
polymer-derived ceramics” Science 351 (Jan), 58-62

[42] Monostori L (2003) “AI and machine learning
techniques for managing complexity, changes and
uncertainties
in
manufacturing”
Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16, 277-291

[56] Ouyang M, Yuan C, Muisener R, Boulares A,
Koberstein J (2000) “Conversion of some siloxane
polymers to suilicon oxide by UV/ozone photochemical
processes” Chemistry of Materials 12, 1591-1596

[43] Mehrabi M, Ulsoy G, Koren Y (2000) “Reconfigurable
manufacturing systems and their enabling technologies”
Int J Manufacturing Technology & Management 1 (1),
114-131

[57] Greulich M, Greul M, Pintat T (1995) “Fast, functional
prototypes via multiphase jet solidification” Rapid
Prototyping J 1 (1), 20-25

[44] Canny J, Goldberg K (1995) “RISC approach to
sensing and manipulation” J Robotic Systems 12, 351363

[58] Frazier W (2014) “Metal additive manufacturing: a
review” J Materials Engineering & Performance 23,
1917-1928

[45] Erdmann M, Mason M (1988) “Exploration of
sensorless manipulation” IEEE J Robotics & Automation
4 (4), 369-379

[59] Bhavar V, Kattire P, Patil V, Khot S, Gujar K, Singh R
(2016) “Review on powder bed fusion technology of
metal
additive
manufacturing”
in
Additive
Manufacturing Handbook (ed. Badiru A, Valencia V,
Liu D), CRC Press, Boco Raton, FL, 251-262

[46] Frosch R, Gallopoulos N (1989) “Strategies for
manufacturing” Scientific American 261 (3), 144-152
[47] Huang S, Liu P, Mokasadar A, Hou L (2013) “Additive
manufacturing and its social impact: a literature review”
Int J Advanced Manufacturing Technology 67, 11911203

[60] Murr L (2015) “Metallurgy of additive manufacturing:
examples from electron beam melting” Additive
Manufacturing 5, 40-53
[61] Gu D, Meiners W, Wissenbach K, Poprawe R (2012)
“Laser additive manufacturing of metallic components:
materials, processes and mechanisms” Int Materials
Review 57 (3), 133-164

[48] Huang R, Riddle M, Graziano D, Warren J, Das S,
Nimbalkar S, Cresko J, Masanet E (2016) “Energy and
emissions saving potential of additive manufacturing:
the case of lightweight aircraft components” J Cleaner
Production 135, 1559-1570

[62] Ding D, Pan Z, Cuiuri D, Li H (2015) “Wire feed
additive manufacturing of metal components:
technologies, developments and future interests” Int J
Advanced Manufacturing Technology 81 (1). 465-481

[49] Yang S, Zhao Y (2015) “Additive manufacturingenabled design theory and methodology: a critical
review” Int J Advanced Manufacturing Technology 80,
327-342

[63] Balla V, Roberson L, O’Connor G, Trigwell S, Bose S,
Bandyopadhyay A (2011) “First demonstration on direct
laser fabrication of lunar regolith parts” Rapid
Prototyping J 18 (6), 451-457

[50] Ford S, Despeisse M (2016) “Additive manufacturing
and sustainability: an exploratory study of the
advantages and challenges” J Cleaner Production 137,
1573-1587

[64] Mueller R, Howe S, Kochmann D, Ali H, Anderson C,
Burgoyne H, Chambers W, Clinton R, De Kestellier X,
Ebelt K, Gerner S, Hofmann D, Hogstrom K, Ives E,
Jerves A, Keeman R, Keravala J, Khoshnevis B, Lim S,
Metzger P, Meza L, Nakaruma T, Nelson A, Partridge
H, Pettit D, Pyle R, Reiners E, Shapiro A, Singer R, Tan
W-L, Vasquez N, Wilcox B, Zelhofer A (2016)
“Automated additive construction (AAC) for Earth and

[51] Campbell I, Bourell D, Gibson I (2012) “Additive
manufacturing: rapid prototyping comes of age” Rapid
Prototyping J 18 (4), 255-258
[52] Ram J, Robinson C, Yang Y, Stucker B (2007) “Use of
ultrasonic consolidation for fabrication of multi-material
structures” Rapid Prototyping J 13 (4), 226-235
15

space using in-situ resources” Proc 15th Biennial ASCE
Int Conf Engineering Science Construction &
Operations in Challenging Environments (Earth &
Space 2016), Reston, VA

[77] Cook S (1983) “Overview of computational
complexity” Communications ACM 26 (6), 401-408
[78] Woods D & Neary T (2009) “Complexity of small
universal Turing machines: a survey” Theoretical
Computer Science 410, 443-450

[65] Eerton S, Hirsch M, Stravroulakis P, Leach R, Clare A
(2016) “Review of in-situ process monitoring and in-situ
metrology for metal additive manufacturing” Materials
& Design 95, 431-445

[79] Bennett C (1995) “Universal computation and physical
dynamics” Physica D 86, 268-273
[80] Ben-Hur A, Siegelman H, Fishman S (2002) “Theory of
complexity for continuous time systems” J Complexity
18, 51-86

[66] King W, Anderson A, Ferencz R, Hodge N, Kamath C,
Khairallah S, Rubenchik A (2015) “Laser powder bed
fusion additive manufacturing of metals: physics,
computational and material challenges” Applied Physics
Review 2, 041304
[67] Chirikjian G, Zhou Y, Suthakorn J (2002) “Selfreplicating robots for lunar development” IEEE/ASME
Trans Mechatronics 7 (4), 462-472
[68] Moses M, Yamaguchi H, Chirikjian G (2009)
“Towards cyclic fabrication systems for modular
robotics and rapid manufacturing” Robotics: Science &
Systems V Conf, University of Washington, Seattle
[69] Ellery A (2016) “John von Neumann’s self-replicating
machine – critical components required” Proc IEEE Int
Conf Systems Man & Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary,
314-319
[70] Ellery A (2016) “Progress towards 3D printed
mechatronic systems” Proc IEEE Int Conf Industrial
Technology with Symp on 3D Printing, Tapei, Taiwan,
pp. 1129-1133
[71] Ellery A (2015) “Artificial intelligence through
symbolic connectionism – a biomimetic rapprochement”
in Biomimetic Technologies: Principles & Applications
(ed. Ngo D), Elsevier Publishing
[72] Schmidhuber J (2015) “Deep learning in neural
networks: an overview” Neural Networks 61, 85-117
[73] Milford M & Wyeth G (2009) “Persistent navigation
and mapping using a biologically inspired SLAM
system” Int J Robotics Research 29 (9), 1131-1153
[74] Rogers G, Bottaci L (1997) “Modular production
systems: a new manufacturing paradigm” J Intelligent
Manufacturing 8, 147-156
[75] Larson S & Ellery A (2015) “Trainable analogue neural
network with application to lunar in-situ resource
utilisation” Proc Int Astronautics Federation Congress,
Jerusalem, IAC-15-D3.3.6
[76] Lee K, Moses M, Chirikjian G (2008) “Robotic selfreplication in structured environments: physical
demonstrations and complexity measures” Int J Robotics
Research 27 (3-4), 387-401
16

BIOGRAPHY

Alex Ellery received a BSc (Hons) Physics from the
University of Ulster, UK (1988), MSc Astronomy from the
University of Sussex, UK (1990) and PhD from Cranfield
Institute of Technology, UK (1995). He is a graduate of
the International Space University summer session
(1993). He worked at Vickers Shipbuilding &
Engineering Ltd UK as a systems design engineer, the
Royal National Throat Nose & Ear Hospital London as a
senior clinical scientist and Logica UK Ltd Space
Division as a software engineer before embarking on an
academic career at Queen Mary University of London
UK as a programme manager on Herschel and Planck
space telescopes, and Kingston University UK and then
Surrey Space Centre UK as a senior lecturer specialized
in space robotics. His current appointment is at Carleton
University in Ottawa, Canada as a Canada Research
Professor having spent a decade as a Canada Research
Chair in Space Robotics & Space Technology. He is the
author of two textbooks “An Introduction to Space
Robotics” (2000) and “Planetary Rovers” (2016) both
published by Praxis-Springer.

17

