70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

IAC-19-D4.1.4x49787
Steps Toward Self-Assembly of Lunar Structures from Modules of 3D-Printed In-Situ Resources
Alex Ellerya*, Abdurr Elaskrib
a

Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON.
K1S 5B6, Canada, aellery@mae.carleton.ca
b
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON.
K1S 5B6, Canada, AbdurrazagElaskri@cmail.carleton.ca
* Corresponding Author
Abstract
This paper explores the idea of 3D printing entire self-assembling robots – structure, actuators, sensors and
electronics – from lunar-derivable material. Such a capability would effectively bootstrap the construction of lunar
bases and other facilities from the Moon itself with the launch of minimal material from Earth. Self-assembly has
long been viewed as a highly desirable capability for autonomous construction of large space and planetary
structures. There are two approaches: (i) the adoption of homogeneous modular building blocks that can be
constructed in large numbers and can configure themselves into an array of different configurations – the cellular
approach – including self-replicating blocks; (ii) a more practical approach that defines a small set of heterogeneous
modules that can act as building blocks for constructing more functionally diverse structures such as lunar bases. We
have focussed on the latter but the technology presented could be readily adapted to the former. In particular, the
common features of all self-assembling modules are that the modules constitute a structure housing a computercontrolled actuator internally and a reversible latching mechanism externally. We have made significant successful
steps towards self-assembling systems in which the modules can be manufactured from in-situ resources. We have
demonstrated a 3D printed DC electric motor in which the only components that were not 3D printed are the wire
coils. We are however working on the wiring aspect and shall present the challenges in achieving this while
restricting ourselves to lunar analogue technologies. Indeed, this aspect is crucial to realising the next stage of
implementing 3D printed computing electronics. We have married our 3D printed motor prototype to a 3D printed
trigon-type panel developed as part of the trigon self-assembling system concept. The trigon concept underlies a
modular approach to self-assembling planetary structures such as bases, etc. The 3D printed motorized panel system
demonstrates that the motor aspect and structural aspects of robotic self-assembling machines are amenable to 3D
printing. Furthermore, motorised self-assembling systems can be leveraged from local resources. This has significant
implications for self-assembling systems in space in general.
Keywords: self-assembly; in-situ resource utilization; 3D-printed electric motors; flat-pack lunar bases
1. Introduction
It is desirable that robotic systems should
automatically design and build other robotic systems
enabled through the versatility of 3D printing (additive
manufacturing). Most effort to date has focussed on the
manufacture of structures through 3D printing. One goal
of robotic 3D printing is to minimise assembly by 3D
printing complex electromechanical systems such as
robotic machines in as few steps as possible. Selfassembling systems are composed of objects that can be
reconfigured for rapid assembly. 4D-printing introduces
time to the 3D printing process. Hence, in the goal of
automatic design and construction of robotic systems,
little attention has been paid to the automatic
manufacture of motor elements – to date,
stereolithographically-fabricated high tolerance 3D
structures have been printed with cavities and
mechanical joints for the insertion of prefabricated
sensors, electronics and actuators to build a simple

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

mobile robot [1]. These components have not been 3D
printed. We have been focussing on the 3D printing of
electric motors as a necessary next step in the automatic
manufacture of robotic systems.
The goal of this work is to 3D print entire selfassembling robots – structure, actuators, sensors and
electronics. We have demonstrated a 3D printed DC
electric motor in which the only components that were
not 3D printed are the wire coils and the motor shaft
(which shall be printed in a prototype under
development). We have married our 3D printed motor
with 3D printed TRIGON panels which are part of the
TRIGON self-assembling system. The 3D printed
motorized panel system demonstrates that the motor
aspect of robotic self-assembling machines is amenable
to 3D printing.
2. 3D Printing Electric Motors
Our electric motor was partially 3D printed by fused
deposition modelling using a Prusa i3 3D printer.

Page 1 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

Rotary electric motors for general applications offer: (i)
good speed/torque versus stroke tradeoff; (ii) good
volumetric compaction; (iii) robustness of performance.
We selected a brushed DC electric motor as the test
motor configuration as it is the most fundamental motor
design from which all others are derived. As in all DC
electric motors, it comprised four main components –
rotor, stator, wiring and brush/commutator assembly.
Both rotor and stator were 3D printed from
commercially available ProtoPasta comprising 50% by
mass magnetic iron particles in 50% PLA (polylactic
acid) matrix (Fig 1). Previously built motor models
indicated that heavier metal loading of 50% by volume
increased the inertia of the rotor which was not offset by
the increased magnetically induced torque yielding a
reduction in rotation speed performance [2]. Energy
losses in magnetic material are due to: (i) hysteresis loss
which can be reduced by low coercivity; (ii) eddy
current loss which can be reduced by low electrical
conductivity and incorporating laminations; (iii)
anomalous losses which can be reduced by using
homogeneous material to permit magnetic domain
migration. For these reasons, magnetic particles
embedded in an insulating matrix ensure that eddy
currents are minimised while magnetic field generation
and threading is maximised. Both rotor and stator
magnets were wire wound and the rotor windings were
connected to the commutator through wire brushes
using 24 MAG copper wire. This motor then constitutes
a series wound self-excited DC motor. The commutator
was a simple set of four thin contact copper sheets. The
rotor was wound with 70 turns per pole while the stator
was wound with 100 turns per pole. The main structure
and commutator core were 3D printed from ABS
(acrylonitrile butadiene styrene) which is more rigid
than PLA. The only non-3D printed parts were the
copper wire coils and the steel motor shaft (the thicker
output shaft was 3D printed PLA). The motor was
connected to a 30 Vdc power supply.

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

Fig. 1. DC electric motors with 3D printed stator and
rotor electromagnets
We have been developing a photolithographicallyprinted wiring pattern to replace the copper wire which
has been demonstrated in a pancake “air” motor
configuration (Fig 2) but it has yet to be integrated into
the 3D printed DC motor model. The four-quadrant
design minimises the number of soldering points to four
compared with a traditional radial pattern of pancake
motors which require not far short of 100 solder points
depending on the size of the rotor cross section. An
interesting question that we shall not explore here
concerns the trade between using a wire winder against
photolithography equipment: a simple wire coil winding
machine can be made from a rotary knife sharpener and
a circular piece with three right-angle brackets for
holding the coil form in place [3]. Another simple coil
winder can be constructed from Meccano [4]. A more
complex universal coil winding machine can also be
readily constructed [5].

Page 2 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

Fig. 2. Printed coil pattern and its implementation in
a pancake motor
We have been exploring the use of 3D printed
permanent magnets as the stators (manufactured by Oak
Ridge National Laboratory) in our 3D printed motor,
but they have yet to be integrated. Once this has been
achieved, it would represent a fully 3D printed DC
electric motor. Furthermore, to increase the volumetric
performance of the motor, we shall be replacing the soft
magnet closed stator with an open permanent magnet of
3D printed NeFeB from Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(Fig 3).

Fig. 3. 3D printed permanent stator magnet
However, these developments have yet to be
integrated into a full motor assembly but are in progress.
3. TRIGON Self-Assembling Panel System

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

Self-assembly is the process where components
automatically assemble themselves into specific
configurations. The self-reconfigurable machine
comprises a number of mechanical units (commonly
homogeneous) which can connect to each other to alter
their morphology and indulge in self-repair. Selfassembly of modular components provides robustness,
reliability, reconfigurability, reusability and ease of
development. One thing many self-assembling and
reconfigurable systems have in common are either
electromagnetic joining and/or motorised actuation.
Rather than developing a 3D printed motor in vacuo, we
have coupled the 3D printed motor concept with
structural panelling as an example of reconfigurability
with an extraterrestrial application. In general, the
determination of the minimum number of tile types that
can be assembled into a given shape (minimum tile set
problem) is NP-hard, there are polynomial time
solutions under certain constraints [6]. Furthermore, the
assembly time can be minimised through partial
ordering. We assume here that the number of panel is
pre-determined by design. Assembly tasks require the
mating of parts subject to contact forces and may be
characterised by positional entropy as a measure of
uncertainty in part position and orientation [7]. Part
entropy can be reduced through fixtures, grippers and
sensing. In a self-assembling system of modules, it is
generally assumed that the modules are homogeneous
and interconnect with each other using actuators. In flatpack unfolding systems, the flat-pack configuration
reduces part entropy by structuring the environment and
acting as combined fixture/gripper with sensors are
limited to motor sensors.
An example of this is PETSAT, a satellite concept
based on a number of subsystem panels – onboard
computer panel, battery panel, communications panel,
attitude control panel and propulsion panel – that are
assembled through plug-in connectors to form an
integrated spacecraft [8]. Each panel has a standardised
structural and thermal design (heat pipe with graphite
insulation) while the interface provides reliable
mechanical latching, one rotational joint/panel,
electrical (power and data) interfaces (such as CAN bus)
and thermal coupling. Multiple panels can be assembled
into different spacecraft configurations.
However, we have been focussed on 3D printing the
TRIGON (transformable robotic infrastructuregenerating object network) panel system, a modular
robotic construction system capable of self-assembling
into trusses, domes, habitats, vehicles, factories and a
variety of other structures (Fig 5) [9]. It is a modular
robotic construction system comprising an adaptable
kit-of-parts to realise the self-assembly of multiple
habitat, rover and hybrid mobitat designs [10,11]. The
TRIGON system is a panel-based self-assembly system
in which each panel has motors integrated into each

Page 3 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

hinge on its edges linking it to other panels. The
TRIGON system is a versatile self-assembly concept.
Motors are integrated into hinges along panel edges
with an offset so any two linked panels can be rotated
through a full 0-360o range [12]. TRIGON panels are
polygonal and designed to self-assemble from a stack of
partially connected panels. The panels can
accommodate payloads at the centre. Most selfassembling systems may be applied to a set of class 1
mobile habitats as a transition to class 2 habitats. Here,
we consider class 3 habitats constructed from selfassembling panels.
There are two panel types, triangle and square
panels, that can self-assemble into a variety of
structures. We have been focussing on a dual set of
linked motorised square TRIGON panels with an offset
3D printed motor. Our TRIGON panel however are
much smaller versions than the full-sized version for
demonstration purposes. The 3D printed square
TRIGON panels and 1:27 reducing gears are
constructed from PLA (Fig 4).

Fig. 4. 3D printed hinged square TRIGON panels
and reduction gear
The hinged TRIGON panels and reduction gear were
connected to the motor assembly (Fig 5) and
successfully demonstrated opening and closing of the
panel. Although a simple demonstration, this indicates
that a complete motorized self-deployment system can
be 3D printed using fused deposition modelling of PLA
and derivatives thereof (less shaft and wiring).

Fig. 5. 3D printed motorized hinged TRIGON panel
assembly

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

TRIGON panels are designed as flat-packs that can
construct 3D enclosure in two ways: (i) unfolding from
pre-configured linkages with other panels from a
compact stowed configuration; (ii) self-assembly where
an integrated manipulator picks and places panels
together for linking. It is the latter capability that
differentiates TRIGON from most flat-pack concepts.
The most flexible configuration involves the adoption of
panel connector “arms” on each edge which act as
motorized brackets that link two panels together. A each
edge, a pair of connector arms act as manipulators to
grapple neighbouring panel. They also possess sensors
and controllers to permit sophisticated motion. The
integrated motors from each panel operate in parallel to
lift either panel with respect to the other. These grasping
latches at the panel edges latch onto neighbouring
panels and roll over the existing structure edge-overedge. Hence, TRIGON panels can roll end-over-end to
relocate into a growing structure of any arbitrary
configuration [13]. However, the assembly of m parts
by a manipulator of n degrees of freedom generates a
configuration space of m+n degrees of freedom, i.e.
assembly requires a path search through the m+n
dimensional space.
Further
development
would
involve
the
incorporation of integrated connector manipulator arms
to deploy the TRIGON panels. We have yet to
implement these more complex and challenging
configurations
necessary
for
self-assembly.
Nevertheless, the deployment of 3D printed drive
motors with the panels demonstrates that these more
complex assemblies are achievable in the near term.
Potentially, in the long-term, TRIGON panels could be
deployed to construct a cassette factory manufacturing
cell implementing 3D printing [14]. This would
represent a step towards a self-replicating machine [15]
beyond current state-of-the-art [16].
Our approach has implications for automated
assembly of 3D structures from 2D flat-packs. Origami
techniques may be employed to create 3D shapes by
folding 2D sheets in different ways. Origami is the art
of folding a flat sheet of paper into a 3D sculpture
through folding but no cutting. The number of creases is
limited and the most iconic origami model is the
Japanese paper crane. The two basic folds are the
valley-fold in which a sheet is folded upwards into a
“V” with the crease at the bottom and the mountain-fold
in a sheet is folded downwards into an “A” with the
crease at the top [17]. All other folds are variations on
these two. Folding in conjunction with cutting can form
almost any sculpture. Miura-ori patterns combine valley
and mountain folds to compress a large area sheet
divided into parallelogram cells into a compact volume.
The Miura map is a rigid fold that may be adopted to
deploy large solar arrays.

Page 4 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

This was demonstrated on the Japanese Space Flyer
Unit (1995). Origami may be used to fabricate selffolding machines such as demonstrated with a crawling
robot initially as a flat sheet with embedded resistive
circuits to activate elastic flexures of shape memory
polymer around thinned hinges [18]. Once folding has
occurred, the hinge is cooled and the polymer hardens
into position. Locomotion was enabled by two eight-bar
linkage chassis, each driven by a single actuator to
actuate forward and aft legs. Millimetre-scale robots are
ideally suited to the combination of photolithographic
(additive) printing, laser (subtractive) machining and
origami
construction
methods
[19].
Soft
photolithography is used to pattern a photoresist which
acts as a mould to create features in a polymer layer.
Pulsed UV laser machining offers spot sizes ~1-10 μm
with minimal heating damage. Millimetre-scale circuits
with solder dots and wires on the faces of a polyhedron
can form the basis of self-assembling multiple
polyhedra into 3D electrical networks [20].
A programming language has been developed which
generates a self-assembly process among agents
emulating cellular morphogenesis and differentiation to
generate a pre-defined global shape [21]. Epithelial cells
differentiate into a wide variety of complex 3D
structures from a 2D sheet of cells during embryonic
growth – skin, capillaries, gut, neural tube, etc. A sheet
of autonomous agents can execute instructions based on
the local environment with no global coordination and
only local communication. The 2D sheet can also form
3D structures through a folding process determined by
origami axioms automatically compiled from the
predefined global shape. There are six Huzita origami
axioms for constructing all folded Euclidean shapes
from straight line folds: (i) between points P1 and P2,
we can fold a line between them; (ii) perpendicular
bisector of line P1P2 folds point P1 onto point P2; (ii)
bisector of angle between lines L1 and L2 folds L1 onto
L2; (iv) line perpendicular to line L1 through point P1
folds L1 onto itself through P1; (v) for points P1 and P2
and a line L1, we can fold P1 onto L1 passing through
P2; (vi) for points P1 and P2 and two lines L1 and L2,
we can fold P1 onto L1 and P2 onto L2. A set of five
biologically-inspired local primitives defining local
interactions can be combined to generate global shapes
– (i) gradients emulate chemical gradients where
concentration relates distance to the chemical source;
(ii) neighbourhood query collects information about
neighbouring agents; (iii) polarity inversion to alter
initial apex-basal polarity if necessary; (iv) cell-to-cell
contact permits communication between agents in
physical contact; (v) flexible folding to contract its apex
or basal fibres to change the shape of the sheet.
Complex 3D structures can be self-assembled from
stacks of 2D panels with motorised joints along the
folds. The combination of direct ink write assembly

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

with wet-folding origami has demonstrated the
construction of 3D shapes [22]. Metallic, ceramic or
polymeric ink (in this case, TiH2 particles loaded in an
organic solvent that is subsequently dried and
annealled) is extruded through a nozzle with three axis
motion capability. Partially dried ink retains elasticity
with E~30-110 MPa permitting folding. The origami
structure of a crane was constructed in 15 steps as a
demonstration. Hence, complex geometries can be
created from origami.
A
variation
of
folding/unfolding
is
contraction/expansion. The crystalline molecule is
actuated by expansion and contraction of its four faces
around a central core to simulate muscle behaviour [2325]. It is cubic with connectors to other modules at the
middle of each face encapsulating five Li batteries for
power, a microcontroller and support circuitry. They do
not move or rotate with respect to each other rather than
moving relative to the complete structure. They move
linearly in the plane of the modules. Each crystalline
robot expands to 4 cm on a side from its contracted state
of 2 cm on a side. Each expansion/contraction is
activated by three binary actuators. All four faces form
part of the connection mechanism supported by serial IR
communications – two faces have active connectors and
two have passive connection slots to form rigid
connections. It can be used to create dynamic structures
with shape-shifting (morphogenesis) capabilities using
its expansion/contraction mechanism and its connectors
to bond different bonds. It can realise any 3D cellular
grid structure and indeed, units can relocate by
travelling through the volume of the structure. A
distributed control algorithm based on cellular automata
(with similarities to hormone-based control) has been
used to reconfigure the crystal robot into different
shapes [26]. Telecubes is a cubic module with six
prismatic degrees of freedom whose sides can expand to
twice its dimensions similar to the crystal robot but
expands in all three dimensions rather than in a plane
[27]. Each of the six faces is driven by a telescoping
linear actuator and each face has mechanical and
electrical connectors with magnetic attachment. The
metamorphic robot system is an extreme version of this
approach in which the modules were deformable planar
six-bar linkage modules that can dynamically
reconfigure themselves individually [28].
4. Active Connectors Between Modules
Self-assembly may also be implemented
through the linking of independent modules. The ability
to 3D print magnets and magnetic devices – soft
electromagnets, hard permanent magnets and electric
motors – are the key components for imparting
mobility/manipulation/bonding in 3D printed selfassembling systems, offering the prospect for 3D
printing entire modular robots including their

Page 5 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

mechatronic components (though we do not address 3D
printing electronics and sensors here). The advantages
of multi-module reconfigurability from modular units
include flexibility of implementation, robustness
through self-repair and low cost through economies of
scale. Self-assembly occurs at all scales with the
common requirement that components must be
sufficiently mobile to interact through relatively weak
forces but there are two main processes – static selfassembly which exploits configurations with global or
local equilibrium and dynamic self-assembly which
dissipates energy to generate quasi-stable patterns
[29,30]. Although the former is most commonly
exploited in engineering self-assembly (as here), the
latter is characteristic of biological self-assembly at the
molecular level and will become increasingly important
towards nanoscale miniaturisation at the molecular level
but even at larger scales random external forcing can be
useful.
Assembly of modules requires the adoption of
standardized fastener bolts in favour of moulded or
welded structures. Robotic assembly requires grappling
of two parts and using tools to join them with fasteners
– in microgravity, solid fixtures are required to align
parts prior to joining. An alternative approach to repair
is the addition of plug-in modules. One of the key
technologies is that each modular unit can make/break
connections with other units, i.e. the docking interface
in terms of mechanical strength and stiffness, precision
of alignment and compliance requirements, power
limitations and stability. The process of assembly and
docking requires knowledge of tolerances in relative
positioning and orientation with a controlled relative
velocity vector. Most docking fixtures are variations on
peg-in-hole tasks. Modular robotics evolved from
quick-change automatic tooling using common
connection mechanisms. Mechanical connectors should
be mated/demated robotically which eliminates
bayonet-style connectors unless a ratchet tool can be
used. All structural connectors must possess alignment
features such as alignment pins to ensure correct
connector orientation with “soft-latch” prior to full
positive
locking.
Robotic
connector/interface
mechanisms have four properties: geometry to provide
simple and rapid self-aligning docking and release,
latching robustness, stiffness and stability with high
impact and load strength, power and data transfer, and
small parts count for easy maintenance [31]. In addition,
low mass and inertia are essential properties yet retain
high impact and load strength. The geometry must
support simple and rapid connection, yet the connection
should be stiff and not buckle catastrophically with
overload.
In self-reconfigurable robots, each module
should be self-contained and inter-connectable with
other modules. Modularity and interconnectibility offers

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

the opportunity for modular, self-reconfigurable robots
which may be configured according to their required
tasks. Tesar & Butler (1989) provide an extensive
review of robotic mechanical component design [32]:
although there are six basic joint mechanisms (revolute,
prismatic, double-revolute universal, cylindrical, balland-socket and planar), all can be represented by
combinations of 1 DOF revolute and prismatic joints.
Prismatic joints are rare in space systems, so revolute
joints are the most general and common form of space
robotic joint. Standardised joint systems (perhaps dual
drive for redundancy) with dedicated electronics
(including encoders, tachometers, torque sensors, motor
controllers, brakes, signal conditioning, etc), structure
and standardised interfaces offer the potential for
modular off-the-shelf designs. Geared motors such as
harmonic drive gearing are preferred over direct drive
motors due to their higher torque-weight ratio and lack
of power requirement at rest. Harmonic drives have
high accuracy and repeatability, negligible backlash,
high reduction ratio within a single stage (1:320) and
high transmission efficiency ~90%. Links should have a
circular cross-section to minimise biased bending
stresses and torsional loads. A modular approach has
been developed which integrated a motor, harmonic
drive and encoder within a connector link [33].
Mechanical connections between robotic modules
should enable direct longitudinal and perpendicular
connections - each module provided a 45o connection
scheme relative to the module main axis to provide this
through 180o rotation relative to the connecting
modules. There were two forms of motor - large motors
of near the base with high torque output and smaller
motors near the wrist with lower torque output. Clearly,
to reduce the loading on the outboard links, all prime
movers should be installed at the shoulder, perhaps
through a series of bevel geared cable drives but such
approaches suffer from large torsional and longitudinal
deformations. The wrist also comprised of separate RPY
joints. A revolute jointed 6 DOF manipulator similar to
the PUMA 560 was constructed from these modules.
The addition of another DOF would be readily
achieved. Such a modular reconfigurable design may be
optimally configured for a given set of tasks determined
by workspace, tip velocity/acceleration, maximum tip
deflection and external forces/moments on the tip. An
early multipurpose high load precision connector was
for the nuclear industry (Westinghouse) to enable 6
DOF modular maintenance robots to be built manually –
the connector was a precision-fit quick-disconnect unit
assembled through a single turn of a threaded collar
with up to 20 O-ring based hydraulic seals and 100
electrical line connectors [34].
Active connectors are new innovations which
provide electromechanical connections rather than
purely mechanical connections. The latch should require

Page 6 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

low power during latching and unlatching but not
require power during its static state. The latch should be
disconnectable from both sides which suggests a
genderless connection scheme. The DRAGON
connector was developed for modular self-reconfiguring
robots has the ability to self-align and has a high
strength-to-weight ratio [35]. It comprises of three
components:
(i)
the guide shaped as two funnels and two
mating cones to align the connectors on
touching capable of correcting 45o offsets
and 20% diameter offset
(ii)
the thin Al outer shell to take the load
(iii)
the steel latching spring blade inside its
cavity within the inside of the shell to keep
the connectors connected
The spring expands against the inside of the shell of
the mated connector to lock it in place. It is actuated by
a shape memory alloy wire along the inside of the
spring which closes the spring with a force of 0.3 N to
release the mating connector. Delatching may also be
achieved by inserting a screw into one of four threaded
holes in the shell to compress the spring. Two IR
emitters within each guiding cone can act as beacons for
docking and two IR receivers at the vertices of the
funnels provide the basis for optically isolated electrical
connections. Within the connector, 12 thick springloaded copper contacts provide a power conduit. The
spring has a shear buckling stress of:

(

)

 = 12k(1−E) ( bt )
s

2

2

2

where ks=buckling coefficient>5.5, t=spring
thickness, b=spring width, E=Young’s modulus,
=Poisson’s constant.
The ACOR (active connector for robotic systems)
comprises a plug and receptacle containing many
flexible lamellae to provide the connection [36]. A
shape memory alloy actuator moves the lamellae ends to
control connection/disconnection. The lamellae are
pushed together to latch. Connection can be controlled
from both plug and/or receptacle side. ACOR can
transmit axial/shear forces and torques. All ACOR
connectors possess both a female receptacle and a male
plug side-by-side which provide the mechanical and
electrical connection. The male lamellae form a
cylindrical ring around the male pin. A shape memory
alloy wrapped around the lamellae when activated
constricts the lamellae towards the centreline, thereby
releasing the connection. The female receptacle for the
pin also includes female lamellae in a cylindrical ring
around the female receptacle. A shape memory alloy
wrapped around the lamellae when activated releases
the lamellae. When connected, the pin is surrounded by
the female pins to provide shear strength. The male and
female lamellae interconnect during engagement

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

through their angled shoulders at the ends of the
lamellae. Either the male or the female actuators may be
activated to release the connection. The male pin may
be constructed from conductive material to provide
electrical power connection. Alternatively, the outer
male and inner female lamellae may be conductive to
provide electrical data connection. A universal
connector comprising side-by-side male and female
components provides the basis for exact alignment of
genderless connectors.
5. Robotic Self-Assembling Systems
Self-propelled macroscopic self-assembling
systems constitute mobile robots which have higher
potential utility such as CEBOT, PolyBot, CONRO, MTRAN, Swarm-bot, fractum and Super mechanocolony. These involve single general-purpose modules
that can be adapted for all functions through selfassembly albeit at a cost in hardware efficiency [37].
Reconfigurable robotic systems can be classified into
three architecture – lattice architectures with modules
arranged into a cubic or hexagonal grid, chain/tree
architectures where modules are connected serially, and
hybrid chain/lattice architectures [38]. These
architectures
may
be
reconfigured
either
deterministically or stochastically. Reconfigurable
robots comprise heterogeneous modules (a small variety
of structural link and motorised joint modules) that are
premised on mechanical, electrical, data and power
interfaces
[39-42].
For
most
reconfigurable
manipulators, a heterogeneous set of modules includes
actuator-driven and unpowered (prismatic and revolute)
joints, (but all, like homogeneous modules, are equipped
with
common
joint
encoders,
tachometers,
accelerometers, microcontroller board, CAN bus
network and electronic interfaces) [43]. The powered
modules, in common with homogeneous modules,
incorporate at least one DC motor, amplifier, gearing
and brake. SMA actuators are typically used to open
latches/connectors.
We briefly review some select activities in the
broad field of self-assembly with particular emphasis on
relevant actuation mechanisms that illustrate the value
of 3D printing electric motors and magnetic devices.
Self-assembly of millimetre-scale components subjected
to random shaking using magnetic forces from
permanent micromagnets has been demonstrated in a
liquid medium [44]. The permanent SmCo and NdFeB
micromagnets were 50-150 μm thick square, oval stripe,
triangle and arrowhead shaped layers embedded into
silicon substrates. Similarly, self-assembly of 3D
objects such as a 3D conformed electrical circuit from
elastomeric sheets embossed with magnetic dipole
patterns has been simulated [45]. A flat projection of a
sphere represented by a series of linked lenticular
shapes (like orange peels) or a radial array of lenticular

Page 7 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

shapes (like a flower) magnetised into a magnetic dipole
form a sphere. The magnets were mounted onto the
sharp ends of the lenticules and a thin wire run between
them to form a soft dipole magnet. The balance of
mechanical and magnetic forces determined the shape
and stability of the 3D structure. In general,
macroscopic self-assembly requires external propulsion
but this imposes a power penalty compared with
environmentally-supplied movement in microscopic
self-assembly [46,47]. Environment-supplied movement
to macroscopic self-assembly tends to have limited
practical utility such as artificially-agitated blocks, e.g.
Penrose’s template-based tiles [48]. As a development
of this, self-reconfiguration of PCB-based units fitted
with electromagnets for bonding has been achieved
passively through Brownian motion implemented
through a shaker table [49].
We describe only a few of the large number of
the “yet another modular robot” systems that represent
more sophisticated self-assembling systems. The use of
artificial modular units which may self-reconfigure into
larger and adaptable structures are generally of two
types – chain/tree architectures which form serial
topologies and lattice architectures which form cubical
or dodecahedral grids [50,51]. They offer the
adaptability and robustness through reconfigurability
and self-repair [52]. There are only three regular
polyhedral shapes that can construct arbitrary spacefilling shapes – the cube and the dodecahedron – which
provide maximum internal volume for any given surface
area. The metamorphic Proteo assembly uses identical
rhombic dodecahedral modules that can assemble into
any overall topology including branched structures for
different tasks [53]. Each module implements a finite
state machine with limited memory while
communication is limited to their immediate
neighbours. They alter shape by rolling relative to each
other’s outer surfaces according to pheromone trails. A
cubic structure is simpler and is commonly adopted for
reconfigurable robotic modules from which arbitrary
structures can be built.
CEBOT (cellular robot) was the first modular
reconfigurable robot to adapt its kinematic configuration
for specific tasks connected through pairs of
hook/receptor interfaces that attach/detach [54-57]. It
comprised of interconnected separable robotic modules
(cells) which could dock with each other in different
configurations. Each heterogeneous cell type performed
a specialised function such as mobile modules with
wheels, rotary and telescopic joint modules for
manipulators and a hand module for end effectors but
all had the same dimensions of width 90 mm by height
50 mm (mass range 1.1-1.3 kg). The mobile cell
performed transport and alignment functions using
infrared diode and ultrasonic sensors for module
detection. Each module incorporated its own motor and

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

processor but could communicate across modules.
CEBOT could dynamically configure its optimal
morphology for a given task defined by: (i) end effector
position/orientation coordinates; (ii) end effector
force/torque requirements; (iii) position accuracy; (iv)
manipulator base coordinates; (v) end effector type; (vi)
workspace constraints. They can be dynamically
configured autonomously using simple rules whilst
cooperatively negotiating with each other [58]. CEBOT
used a genetic knowledge production algorithm to
implement its distributed intelligence of knowledge cell
units [59]. Each knowledge cell implemented a single
task so that a network of knowledge cells represented a
task plan. The knowledge network implemented a
synaptic weighting matrix connecting knowledge cells,
so any task may be represented as a task weighting
matrix.
The
rapidly
reconfigurable
modular
manipulator system (RMMS) configures itself into
different special purpose manipulators from a set of
interchangeable link and joint modules of various sizes
and performances [60-62]. Each module is selfcontained including DC torque motor, brake, harmonic
drive gearing, resolver/tachometer sensors and sensor
interface, microcontroller, motor amplifier, RS-485 and
RS-232 drivers, ADC/DAC circuits and VME-based
communication interface using a message-passing
protocol. Control of both power and data is distributed
through each module to minimise wiring connections in
6 wires that passes through the hollow motor shaft.
There are four types of module – manipulator base, link
module, a set of pivot modules (for perpendicular offset
configurations) and a rotary joint module (for parallel
inline configurations). The base and link modules have
no degrees of freedom while the joint modules have one
degree of freedom. The quick-coupling mechanism
provides secure mechanical connection between
modules with a locking ring collar at the male end with
keyed flanges on male/female ends for accurate
alignment. The locking ring drives a cam to grip the
mating flanges with gripping fingers. Within the locking
ring is a modular male connector with 30 electrical pins
that fit into corresponding female connectors for power
and electronic signals. Infrared LEDs provide alignment
feedback. A guide collar with six alignment pins
prevented damage. From these modules, a large number
of configurations can be constructed due to its
integrated quick-coupling connectors. Its modular taskbased software determines the optimal kinematic
structure defined as a joint velocity trajectory for a
given task over a Cartesian path – transformation via the
Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse is subject to kinematic
limits, singularity avoidance, collision avoidance, and
energy minimisation. The genetic algorithm was used to
search for solutions subject to specific design
knowledge constraints. Assembly of the control

Page 8 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

software re-uses reconfigurable software components
from a software library based on the DenavitHartenburg matrix kinematic convention with inverse
solutions being computed numerically. The RMMS may
be constructed using another manipulator. RMMS was
proposed as a fault tolerant satellite docking system
[63].
CONRO is a cubic homogeneous module with
three DOF that can autonomously connect with identical
modules with connectors on each face to form different
configurations of metamorphic robots such as snake-like
chains, tree-like multiple-leg locomotion, track-like
loops and multiple sub-robots [64-66]. Each selfcontained module incorporated a microcontroller with
ADC, four infrared LED/sensors for communication,
onboard Li batteries, two servomotors and four
connectors. The two motors in the main body of the
module give two degrees of freedom for 90o pitch and
30o yaw rotations (to act as legs). CONRO exhibited
hermaphrodite docking pins at each end with a springloaded latch to lock the pins and receptacles with shape
memory alloy actuators to release the pins. The docking
pins have a lateral groove limiting connection between
modules in the same plane. Compliance in the
connection mechanism is essential to accommodate
alignment uncertainties which is accommodated in the
genderless SINGO connector for the SuperBot
successor to CONRO [67]. CONRO exhibited
bidirectional infrared transmitter/receiver interfaces for
communication between modules.
PolyBot is similar in concept to CONRO as a
homogeneous modular approach to reconfigurable robot
structures [68]. PolyBot is a chain-based reconfigurable
robot system in which each cubic module has one DOF
actuation enabling it to link up into snake-like, legged
and tread-based locomotion systems. Each cubic
module comprises a joint with a DC motor with
harmonic drive for one rotary DOF with multiple
sensors – joint encoder, force/torque sensors, contact
and proximity sensors – and embedded PowerPC
processor communicating over a CAN-bus. Two
opposing connection plates either side of the joint
include hermaphrodite mechanical/electrical connectors
comprised of four grooved pins and four chamfered
receptacles
with
LED/photodiodes
for
position/orientation feedback during docking. A latch of
shape memory alloy holds modules together (passing
current opens the latch) while pins/holes provide
stability. Power is supplied via a tether. The G3 moduke
is smaller than the G2 module due to the employment of
a pancake motor with harmonic drive. Polybot has
constructed a manipulator from 6 PolyBot G3 modules.
Both CONRO and Polybot are chain-type selfreconfigurable robot constructed from connectable
modules which can form snakes, hexapod legs
emanating from a spine, and loops for locomotion

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

[69,70] with potential space applications [71]. Genetic
algorithms may be used to search through a small
inventory of components (power, link, joint,
foot/gripper modules) to determine serial/parallel
kinematic configurations to realize specific tasks using
constraining design rules to reduce the search space
[72,73]. The configuration search problem is NPcomplete so a hierarchical decomposition approach is
favoured to provide further constraints [74].
MTRAN (modular transformer) is a distributed
reconfigurable system of homogeneous two DOF joint
modules has been developed which can be configured as
a hybrid modular chain and lattice system [75-78]. Each
module is constructed from two cubic sections
connected by a servo-motor powered link whilst
incorporating a microprocessor, power supply circuit,
digital bus communications and pulse generator circuit.
Each cube can rotate by 180o about the axis joining the
link and cube. The three cubic faces comprise passive
connection plates using permanent rare earth magnets.
The magnetic force acts against a nonlinear spring and
is slightly larger than the spring force. Active
detachment is enabled by two antagonistic shape
memory alloy coil torsion springs for high power-toweight ratios which exceeds the force difference [79].
Electrical connection is enabled by two pairs of
electrodes for power and one electrode for serial
communications. Reconfiguration is achieved by
detaching the module, rotating the link and reconnecting
to a neighbouring module.
SuperBot is a set of modular 3 DOF cubical
robots based on earlier MTRAN modules capable of
self-reconfigurability [80]. SuperBot modules comprise
two cubical units connected by a link with a central roll
joint. Each cube was attached to one end of the link
through yaw and pitch joints respectively. Each cube
included electronics and batteries. Each cube had six
genderless connectors, one on each side, which
transmitted power and data – they required sensing and
maintenance of tension while docked yet permit simple
release. Each cube included a microcontroller for the
sensors, motors, communications, power and docking. It
adopted a digital hormone control system developed for
CONRO to reconfigure itself. Robotic enzymes
represent an alternative in which the robotic enzyme is a
simulated module of two units linked together [81]. It
has active sites (connectors) which it attempts to attach
to other modules through movements in a simulated
environment.
Tetrabot was a modular and reconfigurable
robotic system offering reusability and reconfiguration
of the same modular units [82]. CORBA (common
object request broker architecture) provided the medium
of control for the distributed network of modules.
Tetrabot used three basic mechanical parts in which a
control system defined the connectivity of parts and

Page 9 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

their kinematic structure. It was based on a multi-link
spherical joint which allowed the interconnection of
truss structures with an arbitrary number of struts.
I-Cubes is a modular self-reconfigurable
robotic system that comprised of cubic mechatronic
modules with a three DOF manipulator for relative
position/orientation
of
the
modules
for
attachment/detachment to other modules [83]. The link
has a handle configuration with a short length d/2
perpendicular to one cube face which bends into a long
length of 2d and then bends into a short length d/2
parallel to the first short length where d=length of side
of a cube. The actuators are at: (i) the base of the first
link with a 360o axial rotation axis along its length, (ii) a
270o elbow pitch halfway along the length of the middle
long length a distance d from the inboard and outboard
bends; (iii) the end of the final link with a 360 o axial
rotation axis along its length. The final link permits a
cross-shaped twist-and-lock attachment to any cube
face. Attachment provides mechanical, electrical and
data interfacing. Much of the mechanical elements of
the cubes and links were 3D printed. The I-Cubes form
a dynamic graph where the links are edges and the
cubes are nodes.
The 4 DOF Molecule robot unit comprises two
atoms linked by a rigid right-angled connection (bond)
similar to MTRAN [84,85]. Each atom has five intermolecular connection points and two motorised degrees
of freedom, one to rotate 180o relative to its bond axis
and one to rotate 180o perpendicular to its bond axis. A
gripper mechanism links the molecules together to
replace the earlier electromagnets. Each molecule
incorporates a microprocessor and motor driver circuits
adopting RS-485 serial connections. Although the Lshaped molecule robot cannot be packed as efficiently
as cube designs, they can configure into 3D structures as
well as 2D tilings (tilings can be stacked) by moving
over each other on the 3D substrate structure. They can
also form locomotive or manipulative structures [86].
The basic fractum unit requires a minimum of
three re-usable connectors, a mechanism of
communication between neighbouring units, each unit
must have an energy source, and for self-repair final
configuration information must be stored in a
distributed fashion [87,88]. Each 2D fractum comprises
six connecting arms – three male and three female –
each equipped with a male electromagnet and female
permanent magnets. The fractum module housing an
onboard microprocessor can connect and disconnect to
other modules autonomously to self-assemble into
different configurations. The polarity of the three
electromagnets determines connection/disconnection so
it can form up to six bonds with other units allowing 12
possible connection types [89,90]. The distance between
two connection types is defined by the number of links
in the shortest path between two nodes. Each module

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

can connect with up to three other modules and
coordination between modules is mediated through an
infrared optical communications channel. The fractum
comprised three layers, each layer comprising three
fixed arms 120o apart mounted onto intervening
bearings to ensure free spinning capability. Top and
bottom layers incorporated three aligned permanent
magnets on the arms paired together top and bottom.
The middle layer has the same shape with three
electromagnets mounted in each arm but oriented at a
yaw angle of 60o with respect to the top and bottom
layers. Control of the electromagnet polarity through Hbridge circuits determines either attractive or repulsive
linkage to another fractum unit. Formations are changed
by switching the electromagnets that permit morphing
shapes.
Programmable parts involve modules subjected
to random perturbations on a 2D air table so that they
can collide and stick through switchable electromagnets
[91]. Each programmable part comprises an equilateral
triangle chassis with an actuated magnetic latch (to
rotate 180o to generate attractive or repulsive polarity)
and an infrared transceiver on each side, all supported
by a microcontroller and control circuitry.
Reconfigurable robotics involves varying the kinematic
configuration of motors, sensors and control electronics
– this yields flexibility in configurations of vehicle
chassis, manipulator kinematics, end-effector/tooling,
onboard computing and power systems.
6. Control of Self-Assembly
Challenges in assembling modular components into
kinematic structures revolve around kinematic and
dynamic analysis to match the optimal structure to the
required task [92]. This requires consideration of
multiple metrics such as manipulability measure,
kinematic error metrics, torque limits, joint excursions,
etc [93]. Modular robotic manipulator systems comprise
standardised link and joint modules that may be
assembled into different kinematic configurations
optimally designed for a specific task. Joint modules
may be revolute, prismatic, cylindrical or screw joints
that connect to link modules through ports to form a
kinematic tree. A task may be represented as a series of
end-effector positions defining a cartesian trajectory.
Genetic algorithms may be employed to search for an
optimal assembly configuration for that task based on an
assembly fitness function quantified as the
manipulability measure
assessed
on an inverse kinematics-based workspace check [94].
The search space for kinematic design can be pruned
substantially by applying physical rules to eliminate
inappropriate solutions [95]: (i) all configurations
require a power/control module; (ii) modules are
assembled into serial chains only; (iii) all configurations
terminate in an end effector; (iv) all modules do not

Page 10 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

need to be used. The genetic algorithm can then be
applied to search for feasible kinematic assemblies of
connected modules [96]. The genetic algorithm may
encode a tree-based representation tested within a
dynamic simulator environment. An ontogeny – be it
biological or artificial – constitutes an assembly plan of
sequential procedures that prescribes how to construct
an organism by exploiting the physics of its
environment [97]. A two-level genetic algorithm can
search for the optimal kinematic configuration including
revolute/prismatic joint selection, link lengths and total
number of degrees of freedom from a task specification
[98]. The upper level GA determines the overall
topology while the lower level GA determines the
inverse kinematics solutions based on the DenavitHartenburg matrix representation. The fitness function
may be expanded to incorporate six criteria:
where
wi=weights,
=reachability of end effector to task, li=length of link i,
dj=distance of task j from base, n=maximum number of
DOF, m=number of subtasks,
to

goal,

=linear distance

=angular
=penalty

distance

to

goal,

function,

=collision penalty if obstacle exists within a safe area
otherwise cij=0, dij=distance of link i from obstacle j,
si=security
distance,
o=number of obstacles,
=minimum complexity measure, ri=1 if
joint i is R but 0 otherwise, e=end effector distance from
base,
=dexterity measure,
=manipulability index. In CEBOT for example, the
optimal minimised criteria for the assembled
configuration was defined as [99]:

where wi=weights, m=total number of task points j,
ej=position error at task j as a function of link and joint
rigidity, Tj=required end effector force/torque at task j
to support payload and outboard links, D(j+1) drive
function transformation from task j to j+1, C=cost
parameter typically total joint torque or motor energy
consumption. This acted as a performance measure for
an optimal controller for self-assembly. Task-based
design is an approach to the design of optimally
configured manipulators for specific tasks such as Space
Shuttle tile servicing on-orbit [100]. In swarm-bots,
neural networks implemented in each s-bot module may
be evolved to perform integrated sensorimotor
coordination and decision making [101]. This
implements a local behaviour-based controller that
requires no inter-agent communication or coordination.
Three primitive collective behaviours based on
measuring distance to neighbours can form arbitrary
IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

shapes [102]: (i) edge-following; (ii) gradient formation;
(iii) localisation. A set of stigmergic if-then rules for
automated self-assembly from bricks has been simulated
similar to potential force fields [103]. Artificial
gradients provide the means for coordination. Simple
local control rules can generate emergent behaviours to
grow different global structures according to resulting
(scent) gradients [104]. Self-assembly may proceed
hierarchically at multiple levels (nested hierarchy)
through rule-based interactions of simple modules to
generate new emergent properties at each level [105].
Control of reconfigurable modules is generally
distributed with limited information exchange between
modules. Market-based communication, interaction and
coordination of resources and scheduling are based on
negotiation (auction) through the contract net protocol
or a variant thereof. Agents typically interact through
negotiation mediated by the contract net protocol based
on a call for bid, bid submission and contract award
[106,107]. The contract net protocol is a simple
coordination mechanism that has been commonly
adopted but it has been supplemented for more recent
market mechanisms, auctions and other trading
mechanisms. The disadvantages to a market system are
the complexity of the bidding process and cheating
through collusion. Vickrey’s auction in which the
highest bidder wins but pays the second highest bid
price promotes fairness. The multirobot task allocation
problem – a variation on the multiple travelling
salesman problem - is best solved using optimisation
such as simulated annealling or genetic algorithms over
a market-based auction approaches such as the contract
net protocol (in which cooperation is negotiated in a
bidding process) [108,109].
Self-assembling robotic configurations from
homogeneous modules may be controlled through
several different mechanisms based on some form of
distribution of information. In the fractum module
system of self-assembly, diffusive communication
between units represents the average difference between
units which forms the basis for self-assembly and selfrepair [110]:
where
K=diffusion coefficient, L=leak constant. CONRO and
SuperBot implemented an adaptive distributed control
mechanism to provide global control of the kinematic
configuration through hormone-inspired asynchronous
message passing between modules for dynamic
coordination [111,112]. Hormones are characterised by
having no specific destination by propagating through
the network with different effects on different receivers.
Some organisms use hormones for morphallaxis to
regenerate limbs through self-organisation of remaining
cells, e.g. lobsters and hydra. The digital hormone
model is based on the Turing reaction-diffusion
equation as the basis for chemical morphogenesis. A set
of differential equations model pattern formation in a

Page 11 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

ring of modules (cells) which communicate through
hormones (morphogens). The diffusion rate dynamics of
the ring of i=1,..,n cells are given by:
dxi
dt

= f ( xi , y i ) + u( xi +1 − 2 xi + xi −1 )

dyi
dt

= g ( xi , yi ) + v ( yi +1 − 2 yi + yi −1 )

where xi=concentration of hormone x in cell i,
yi=concentration of hormone y in cell i, u,v=cell-to-cell
diffusion
rate
of
x
and
y
hormones,
f(x,y),g(x,y)=chemical reaction rate increase. According
to this model, artificial hormones are propagated from
module to module. The CONRO topological network
implemented a loop of receiving and sending hormones
between neighbours and acting on the local instructions
based on these messages. Hormones are distributed
messages without a specific destination and trigger
different actions in different subsystems. It reduces the
communications cost to O(kn) where n=number of
modules yet maintains global synchronisation at a local
level. There are special types of hormones such as probe
hormones that monitor local connection topography. On
receipt of a hormone, a module relays it to all its active
links (except the receiving link) thereby propagating the
hormone through the network. To ensure that each
hormone is received only once for each module a stored
rule-base selects and executes actions determining how
the module reacts to hormones. Although each module
possesses the same rule-base local action vary according
to local topology and internal state. Hormones
implement actions such as gait control by commanding
actions and polling sensors. They have a finite lifetime
after which they become inactive. The use of
pheromones is not strictly necessary – ants successfully
build nests from small stones without the use of
pheromones [113]. In this case, ants respond to the
density of small grains which act as an attractor thereby
constructing the nest brick-by-brick. Furthermore, as
stones accumulate, building accelerates until the nest is
complete.
Graph grammars have been proposed for modelling
the motion of large numbers of particles and their
mutual interactions – they capture local interaction rules
for exhibiting specific behaviours for each particle but
although useful for large numbers of particles does not
appear to offer great advantages over alternative
methods [114]. Cellular automata representation has
been used to control reconfiguration by modelling
growth from an arbitrarily selected initial seed from a
random population of modules through a gradient
descent of artificial chemical concentrations created
using local communication between neighbouring
modules [115]. The hormone control approach may be
combined with artificial embryogenesis both of which
exhibit diffusion processes to model growth [116].
Programmable parts are homogeneous modules that
self-assemble into a global configuration based on local

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

“chemical” interactions rules [117]. The interactions
rules are defined by a graph grammar associated with
each programmable part that models the logical physics
of particle bonding (polymerisation) between two
particles (particles representing each robot module):
|a…a→b-b (rule 1 - r1– two unbounded particles
a and a can bind together to form b-b)
Ф=|a…b→b-c (rule 2 - r2)
|b…b→c-c (rule 3 – r3)
The state of the system evolves as a labelled graph
G=(V,E,L) according to the initial assignment of labels
a,b,c where V=vertex set of integers to index the
particles (vertex set represents latching connectors),
E=edge set of edge pairs from V, and L:V→Σ=labelling
function that associates a label L(i)єΣ with each particle
iєV where Σ={a,b,c,…}=set of labels. The final
assembly is reachable if there a graphical trajectory
from the initial assembly through the sequential
application of the interaction rules:
.
There is a considerable range of options for controlling
the self-assembly process in which bio-inspiration plays
a dominant role.
7. Applications of Self-Assembly
A small number of reconfigurable modules can yield
a fleet of ISRU rovers for different functions at low cost
and enhanced system reliability but without loss of
performance. These modules may include actuated
joints with integrated motors, links which may be
connected serially or in parallel, a variety of endeffector tooling compatible with a standard wrist plate,
sensors with dedicated signal processing electronics,
wheels with integrated motor control units, etc. These
components may be configured into rover/manipulator
platforms for different roles. Such configurations must
be performed autonomously – there must be interface
modules capable of moving to and manipulating other
modules. This system could provide the basis of robot
colonies to perform coordinated functions. Swarm-Bots
are composed of modular s-bots which are unique in
adopting two integrated differential tracks with wheels
(treels) for rough terrain mobility [118,119]. S-bots also
have a rotational upper chassis turret, a single DOF
pitch arm and a gripper to attach to another s-bot’s
turret, a suite of sensors and onboard microprocessor
implementing a neural network controller and battery.
An autonomous self-replicating Lego robot comprised
of six modules in which the replicating robot selfassembles the modules into a growing structure [120].
Module 1 comprised batteries, touch sensor and contact
sensor; module 2 comprised state machine and contact
sensors; module 3 comprised left motor and motor drive
circuit; module 4 comprised right motor and barcode
reader; module 5 comprised a relay circuit; and module
6 comprised a tracking sensor. The robot possessed
three simple behaviours – forward line-tracking, reverse

Page 12 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

and left turn - to run a circular circuit guided by a line
around a pre-structured environment with modules
placed at specific locations. It required both a complex
set of modules and a structured environment limiting the
adaptability of the self-assembly scheme. This work was
akin to a physical instantiation of the low-complexity
replication without universal construction.
Both formation flying and self-assembly of
spacecraft requires high degrees of control. Formation
flying is reminiscent of many types of animal groupings
(swarming) which is commonly modelled as a diffusion
process constrained by repulsive and attractive taxes
(nominally modelled as a Fokker-Planck equation)
[121]. On-orbit assembly of large composite spacecraft
has been considered essential for large modular space
structures [122]. One example is to employ more
compact structurally connected versions of ESA’s
Darwin and NASA’s Terrestrial Planet Finder without
the need for formation flying [123,124]. Although this
reduces the interferometric baseline achievable to ~1050m, station keeping issues are eliminated (although
additional problems such as structural vibration become
important). Traditionally, this has involved the use of
astronauts to perform such operations but robotic selfassembly has become feasible using swarm control and
self-organisation techniques of distributed robotics
[125].
The ultimate example of self-reconfiguring robots in
space for self-assembly of large space structures (such
as solar power satellites) is the freeflying intelligent
fibre/rope (FIMER) robot concept that uses a tether
between two robot freeflyer robots to autonomously
dock them [126]. The two freeflyers at the ends of the
tether can be reeled in and out. Each freeflyer unit is a
complete spacecraft functionally including ion engines
with a tether winch, reconfigurable connector and
flexible robot arm for grasping as payloads. The largescale self-assembly process may be controlled through
the digital hormone model [127]. In FIMER,
components to be joined broadcast a docking
requirement signal to which appropriately located
FIMER(s) respond by grasping the components and
reeled them together. For fine assembly tasks, positional
entropy may be used to quantify assembly tasks in terms
of uncertainty in position/orientation which in turn
determines contact forces during mating of parts [128].
Positional entropy is based on the probability
distribution of parts position/orientation defined by an
ensemble of repeated assembly tests. Positional entropy
may be reduced by fine manipulation with sensory
feedback, jigs and fixtures.
8. Conclusions
We have made significant headway in demonstrating
the feasibility of 3D printed self-assembling robotic
machines. The key to this is the development of the 3D

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

printed electric motor which is near completion. We
have demonstrated a 3D printed system of the (near) 3D
printed motor with the TRIGON panel which has the
versatility to be both self-deploying and selfassembling. Although much remains to be done, we
conclude that we are well on track without any
significant showstoppers. The chief limitations in
homogeneous self-assembling robot modules are in the
strength of the intermodule bonds (typically magnetic),
motor torque capabilities and dexterity. This limits
number of modules that can be lifted in a serial
configuration and so limits the practical applications of
reconfigurable robotics. For example, M-TRAN is
based on a lattice of cubic modules, each of which
comprises two blocks connected through rotary joint to
an intervening link [129]. Earlier magnetic connections
of M-TRAN had been replaced by motor-driven
mechanical latches. Most of these issues may be
addressed through modular manipulator approaches by
introducing heterogeneous modules with a range of
motor torque capabilities. The 3D printed motor offers
the prospect of in-situ manufacture of electric motors to
fit the task considerably widening the applicability of
reconfigurable robotics.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank contributions from
Scott Howe at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory for CAD
drawings of TRIGON panels, and Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Tennessee USA and National Research
Council of Canada, Quebec, Canada for a number of 3D
printed components to our motors.
References
[1] De Laurentis K, Mavroidis C, Kong F (2004) “Rapid robot
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

reproduction” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (Jun), pp.
86-92.
Elaskri A, Ellery A (2018) “Developing techniques to 3D print
electric motors” Proc Int Symp Artificial Intelligence Robotics
and Automation in Space, Madrid, Spain.
Erwin H (1932) “Simple coil winder: new use for a cheap knife
sharpener”
Radio
World
(Feb),
http://www.vintageradio.net/forum/showthread.php?t=52988
Robinson P (1960) “Simple tuning coil winder” Radio
Constructor
(Dec),
http://www.vintageradio.net/forum/showthread.php?t=52988
Gingery D (2015) “Universal Coil Winding Machine” David J
Gingery Publishing
Adleman L, Cheng Q, Goel A, Huang M-D, Kempe D, de
Espanes M, Rothemund K (2002) “Combinatorial optimisation
problems in self-assembly” Proc 34th Annual ACM Symp Theory
of Computing, Montreal, 23-32
Sanderson A (1984) “Parts entropy methods for robotic
assembly system design” Proc Int Conf Robotics & Automation,
600-608
Nakasuka S, Sugawara Y, Sahara H, Koyama K, Okada T,
Kobayashi C (2008) “System design and control aspects of a
novel satellite concept “panel extension satellite (PETSAT)””
IFAC Proc 41 (2), pp, 14048-15053.
Howe A (2007) “Self-assembling modular robotic structures”
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 14 (4), pp. 26-33.

Page 13 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

[10] Howe S, Gibson I (2006) “MOBITAT2: a mobile habitat based

on the trigon construction system” Proc 2nd Int Space
Architecture Symp, San Jose, AIAA 2006-7337
[11] Howe S (2007) “Self-assembling modular robotic structures”
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 14 (4), 26-33
[12] Howe A, Gibson I (2006) “Trigon robotic pairs” AIAA Space
2006 Conference & Exhibition, San Jose, CA, AIAA 2006-7407.
[13] Howe A, Gibson I (2006) “Trigon panel size optimization
studies” 2nd International Space Architecture Symp. San Jose,
CA, AIAA 2006-7328
[14] Howe A (2006) “Cassette factories and robotic bricks: a
roadmap for establishing deep space infrastructures” SAE Trans
J Aerospace, SAE paper no. 2005-01-2911, pp. 330-363.
[15] Ellery A (2016) “Are self-replicating machines feasible?” AIAA
J Spacecraft & Rockets 53 (2), pp. 317-327.
[16] Jones R, Haufe P, Sells E, Iravani P, Olliver V, Palmer C,
Bowyer A (2011) “RepRap – the replicating rapid prototyper”
Robotica 29 (Jan), pp. 177-191
[17] Perks S (2015) “Flat-pack physics” Physics World (Dec), 21-24
[18] Felton S, Tolley M, Demaine E, Rus D, Wood R (2014)
“Method for building self-folding machines” Science 345, 644646
[19] Wood R (2014) “Challenge of manufacturing between macro
and micro” American Scientist 102 (Mar/Apr), 124-131
[20] Gracias D, Tien J, Breen T, Hsu C, Whitesides G (2000)
“Forming electrical networks in three dimensions by selfassembly” Science 289, 1170-1172
[21] Nagpal R (2002) “Programmable self-assembly using
biologically-inspired multiagent control” Proc 1st Int Conf
Autonomous Agents & Multiagent Systems: Part 1, 418-425
[22] Ahn Y, Shoji D, Hansen C, Hing E, Dunand D, Lewis J (2010)
“Printed origami structures” Advanced Materials 22, 2251-2254
[23] Rus D & Vona M (1999) “Self-reconfiguration planning with
compressible unit modules” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 2513-2520
[24] Rus D & Vona M (2000) “Physical implementation of the selfreconfiguring crystalline robot” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 1726-1733
[25] Rus D & Vona M (2001) “Crystalline robots: selfreconfiguration with compressible unit modules” Autonomous
Robots 10, 107-124
[26] Butler Z, Fitch R, Rus D (2002) “Distributed control for unitcompressible robots: goal recognition, locomotion and splitting”
IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 7 (4), 418-430
[27] Suh J, Homans S, Yim M (2002) “Telecubes: mechanical design
of a module for self-reconfigurable robotics” Proc IEEE Int
Conf Robotics & Automation, 4095-4101
[28] Chirikjian G (1994) “Kinematics of a metamorphic robotic
system” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 449-455
[29] Whitesides G, Grzybowski B (2002) “Self-assembly at all
scales” Science 295, pp. 2418-2421.
[30] Whitesides G, Boncheva M (2002) “Beyond molecules: selfassembly of mesoscopic and macroscopic components” Proc
National Academy Sciences 99 (8), pp. 4769-4774.
[31] Nilsson M (2002) “Connectors for self-reconfiguring robots”
IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 7 (4), 473-474
[32] Tesar D & Butler M (1989) “Generalised modular architectures
for robot structures” ASME Manufacturing Review 2 (2), 91-118
[33] Cohen R et al (1992) “Conceptual design of a modular robot”
Trans ASME J Mechanical Design 114 (Mar), 117-125
[34] Tesar D & Butler M (1989) “Generalised modular architectures
for robot structures” ASME Manufacturing Review 2 (2), 91-118
[35] Nilsson M (2002) “Heavy-duty connectors for self-reconfiguring
robots” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 4071-4076
[36] Badescu M & Mavroidis C (2003) “Novel active connector for
modular robotic systems” IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 8
(3), 342-351

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

[37] Sanderson A (1996) “Modular robotics: design and examples”
Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, pp. 460-466.

[38] Yim M, She W-M, Salemi B, Rus D, Moll M, Lipson H, Klavins
E, Chirikjian G (2007) “Modular self-reconfigurable robot
systems” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (Mar), pp. 4352.
[39] Cohen R, Lipton M, Dai M & Benhabib B (1992) “Conceptual
design of a modular robot” ASME J Mechanical Design 114
(Mar), pp. 117-125.
[40] Paredis C, Brown B, Khosla P (1996) “Rapidly deployable
manipulator” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, pp.
1434-1439.
[41] Paredis C, Brown H & Khosla P (1997) “Rapidly deployable
manipulator system” Robotics & Autonomous Systems 21, pp.
289-304
[42] Farritor S, Dubowsky S (2001) “On modular design of field
robotic systems” Autonomous Robots 10, pp. 57-65
[43] Yim M, White P, Park M, Sastra J (2008) “Modular selfreconfigurable robots” Springer reprint, p. 19-32
[44] Shetye S, Eskinazi I, Arnold D (2009) “Part-to-part and part-tosubstrate magnetic self-assembly of millimetre scale components
with angular orientation” Proc 22nd IEEE Int Conf
Microelectromechanical Systems, 669-672
[45] Boncheva M, Andreev S, Mahadevan L, Winkleman A,
Reichman D, Prentiss M, Whitesides S, Whitesides G (2005)
“Magnetic self-assembly of three-dimensional surfaces from
planar sheets” Proc National Academy Sciences 102 (11), 39243929
[46] Esch J (2008) “Introduction to the paper by Gross and Dorigo:
self-assembly at the macroscopic scale” Proc IEEE 96 (9), 14871489
[47] Gross R, Dorigo M (2008) “Self-assembly at the macroscopic
scale” Proc IEEE 96 (9), 1490-1508
[48] Penrose L (1958) “Mechanics of self-reproduction” Annals of
Human Genetics 23 (1), 59-72
[49] White P, Kopanski K, Lipson H (2004) “Stochastic selfreconfigurable cellular robotics” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 1307499
[50] Murata S, Kurokawa H, Yoshida E, Tomita K, Kokaji S (1998)
“3D self-reconfigurable structure” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics
& Automation, 432-439
[51] Yim M, Shen W-M, Salemi B, Rus D, Moll M, Lipson H,
Klavins E, Chirikjian G (2007) “Modular self-reconfigurable
robot systems” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (Mar),
2-11
[52] Yim M, Zhang Y, Duff D (2002) “Modular robots” IEEE
Spectrum (Feb), 30-34
[53] Bojinov H, Casal A, Hogg T (2002) “Multiagent control of selfreconfigurable robots” Artificial Intelligence 142, 99-120
[54] Fukuda T & Nakagawa S (1988) “Dynamically reconfigurable
robotic system” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation,
1581-1586
[55] Fukuda T & Kawauchi Y (1990) “Cellular robotic system
(CEBOT) as one of the realisation of self-organising intelligent
universal manipulator” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 662-667
[56] Fukuda T, Nakagawa S, Kawauchi Y, Buss M (1989) “Structure
decision method for self-organising robots based on cell
structures – CEBOT” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 695-700
[57] Fukuda T, Ueyama T, Kawauchi Y, Arai F (1992) “Concept of
cellular robotic system (CEBOT) and basic strategies for its
realisation” J Computers & Electrical Engineering 18 (1), 11-39
[58] Ueyama T & Fukuda T (1993) “Self-organisation of cellular
robots using random walk with simple rules” Proc IEEE Int
Conf Robotics & Automation, 595-600
[59] Kawauchi Y, Inaba M, Fukuda T (1992) “Self-organising
intelligence for cellular robotic system ‘CEBOT’ with genetic

Page 14 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.
knowledge production algorithm” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics
& Automation, 813-818
[60] Paredis C, Brown H, Khosla P (1996) “Rapidly deployable
manipulator system” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 1434-1439
[61] Paredis Cm Brown H, Khosla P (1997) “Rapidly deployable
manipulator system” Robotics & Autonomous Systems 21, 289304
[62] Cohen R et al (1992) “Conceptual design of a modular robot”
Trans ASME J Mechanical Design 114 (Mar), 117-125
[63] Paredis C & Khosla P (1997) “Agent-based design of fault
tolerant manipulators for satellite docking” Proc IEEE Int Conf
Robotics & Automation, 3473-3480
[64] Castano A, Shen W-M, Will P (2000) “CONRO: towards
deployable robots with inter-robot metamorphic capabilities”
Autonomous Robots 8, 309-324
[65] Castano A & Will P (2000) “Mechanical design of a module for
reconfigurable robots” Proc IEEE/RSJ Int Conf Intelligent
Robots & Systems, 2203-2209
[66] Castano A, Behar A, Will P (2002) “Conro modules for
reconfigurable robots” IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 7 (4),
403-409
[67] Shen W-S (2008) “Self-reconfigurable robots for adaptive and
multifunctional tasks” Proc 26th Army Science Conf, Florida
[68] Yim M, Duff D, Roufas K (2000) “PolyBot: a modular
reconfigurable robot” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 514-520
[69] Stoy K, Shen W-M, Will P (2003) “Simple approach to the
control of locomotion in self-reconfigurable robots” Robotics &
Autonomous Systems 44, 191-199
[70] Yim M, Zhang Y, Roufas K, Duff D, Eldershaw C (2002)
“Connecting and disconnecting for chain self-reconfiguration
with PolyBot” IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 7 (2), 442-451
[71] Yim M, Roufas K, Duff D, Zhang Y, Eldershaw C, Homans S
(2003) “Modular reconfigurable robots in space applications”
Autonomous Robots 14, 225-237
[72] Farritor S, Dubowsky S, Rutman N, Cole J (1996) “Systemslevel modular design approach to field robotics” Proc IEEE Int
Conf Robotics & Automation, 2890-2895
[73] Farritor S & Dubowsky S (2001) “On modular design of field
robotic systems” Autonomous Robots 10, 57-65
[74] Casal A & Yim M (1999) “Self-reconfiguration planning for a
class of modular robots” Proc SPIE Conf Sensor Fusion &
Decentralised Control in Robotic Systems II, Boston, Mass,
3839, 246-257
[75] Tomita K, Murata S, Yoshida E (2000) “Development of a selfreconfigurable modular robotic system” Proc SPIE Sensor
Fusion & Decentralised Control in Robotic Systems III (ed.
McKee G, Schenker P), 4196, 469-476
[76] Murata S, Yoshida E, Kurokawa H, Tomita K, Kokaji S (2001)
“Concept of self-reconfigurable modular robotic system”
Artificial Intelligence in Engineering 15, 383-387
[77] Murata S, Yoshida E, Kamimura A, Kurokawa H, Tomita K,
Kokaji S (2002) “M-TRAN: self-reconfigurable modular robotic
system” IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 7 (4), 431-441
[78] Murata S & Kurokawa H (2007) “Self-reconfigurable robots”
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (Mar), 71-78
[79] Yoshida E, Murata S, Kokaji S, Kamimura A, Tomita K,
Kurokawa H (2002) “Get back in shape!” IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine (Dec), 54-60
[80] Salemi B, Moll M, Shen W-M (2006) “SuperBot: a deployable,
multifunctional modular self-reconfigurable robotic systems”
Proc IEEE/RSJ Int Conf Intelligent Robots & Systems, 363636411
[81] Rubenstein M, Krivokon M, Shen W-M (2004) “Robotic
enzyme-based autonomous self-replication” Proc IEEE/RSJ Int
Conf Intelligent Robots & Systems 3, 2661-2666

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

[82] Sanderson A (1996) “Modular robotics: design and examples”
Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 460-466

[83] Unsal C, Kiliccote H, Khosla P (2001) “Modular selfreconfigurable bipartite robotic system: implementation and
motion planning” Autonomous Robots 10, 23-40
[84] Rus D, Butler Z, Kotay K, Vona M (2002) “Self-reconfiguring
robots” Communications ACM 45 (3), 39-45
[85] Kotay K, Rus D, Vona M, McGray C (1998) “Self-reconfiguring
robotic molecule” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation,
424-431
[86] Kotay K, Rus D (1999) “Locomotion versatility through selfreconfiguration” Robotics & Autonomous Systems 26, 217-232
[87] Murata S, Kurokawa H, Kokaji S (1994) “Self-assembling
machine” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 441-448
[88] Tomita K, Murata S, Kurokawa H, Yoshida E, Kokaji S (1999)
“Self-assembly and self-repair method for a distributed
mechanical system” IEEE Trans Robotics & Automation 15 (6),
1035-145
[89] Yoshida E, Murata S, Tomita K, Kurokawa H, Kokaji S (1999)
“Experimental study on a self-repairing modular machine”
Robotics & Autonomous Systems 29, 79-89
[90] Murata S, Yoshida E, Kurokawa H, Tomita K, Kokaji S (2001)
“Self-repairing mechanical systems” Autonomous Robots 10, 721
[91] Klavins E (2007) “Programmable self-assembly” IEEE Control
Systems Magazine (Aug), 43-56
[92] Bi Z, Gruver W, Zhang W, Lang S (2006) “Automated
modelling of modular robotic configurations” Robotics &
Autonomous Systems 54, 1015-1025
[93] Bi Z & Zhang W (2001) “Concurrent optimal design of modular
robotic configuration” J Robotic Systems 18 (2), 77-87
[94] Chen I-M, Burdick J (1995) “Determining task optimal modular
robot assembly configurations” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 132-137
[95] Farritor S, Dubowsky S (2001) “On modular design of field
robotic systems” Autonomous Robots 10, 57-65
[96] Faina A, Bellas F, Orjales F, Souto D, Duro R (2015) “Evolution
friendly modular architecture to produce feasible robots”
Robotics & Autonomous Systems 63, 195-205
[97] Rieffel J, Pollack J (2005) “Automated assembly as situated
development: using artificial ontogenies to evolve buildable 3D
objects” Proc 7th Annual Conf Genetic & Evolutionary
Computation, 99-106
[98] Chocron O, Bidaud P (1997) “Genetic design of 3D modular
manipulators” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 223228
[99] Fukuda T, Kawauchi Y (1990) “Cellular robotic system
(CEBOT) as one of the realisations of self-organising intelligent
universal manipulator” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 662-667
[100]
Kim J-O, Khosla P (1993) “Design of Space Shuttle tile
servicing robot: an application of task based kinematic design”
Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics & Automation, 867-874
[101]
Tuci E, Gross R, Trianni V, Mondada F, Bonani M,
Dorigo M (2006) “Cooperation through self-assembly in multirobot systems” ACM Trans Autonomous & Adaptive Systems 1
(2), 115-150
[102]
Rubenstein M, Cornejo A, Nagpal (2014) “Programmable
self-assembly in a thousand-robot swarm” Science 345, 795-799
[103]
Grushin A, Reggia J (2008) “Automated design of
distributed control rules for the self-assembly of prespecified
artificial structures” Robotics & Autonomous Systems 56, 334359
[104]
Bojinov H, Casal A, Hogg T (2000) “Emergent structures
in modular self-reconfigurable robots” Proc IEEE Int Conf
Robotics & Automation, 1734-1741

Page 15 of 16

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
Copyright ©2019 by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF). All rights reserved.

[105]

Dorin A, McCormack J (2002) “Self-assembling
dynamical hierarchies” Artificial Life VIII (ed. Standish, Abbass,
Bedau), MIT Press, 423-428
[106]
Shen W, Norrie D (1999) “Agent-based systems for
intelligent manufacturing: a state-of-the-art survey” Knowledge
& Information Systems 1, 129-156
[107]
Shen W, Wang L, Hao Q (2006) “Agent-based distributed
manufacturing process planning and scheduling: a state-of-theart survey” IEEE Trans Systems Man & Cybernetics C:
Applications & Reviews 36 (4), 563-577
[108]
Badreldin M, Hussein A, Khamis A (2013) “Comparative
study between optimisation and market-based approaches to
multi-robot task allocation” Advances in Artificial Intelligence,
article no 256524
[109]
Khamis A, Hussein A, Elmogy A (2015) “Multi-robot task
allocation: a review of the state-of-the-art” Cooperative Robots
& Sensor Networks (ed. Koubaa A, Martinez-de Dois J), Studies
in Computational Intelligence 604, 31-51
[110]
Yoshida E, Murata S, Tomita K, Kurokawa H, Kokaji S
(1999) “Experimental study on a self-repairing modular
machine” Robotics & Autonomous Systems 29, 79-89
[111]
Salemi B, Shen W-M, Will P (2001) “Hormone-controlled
metamorphic robots” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, 4194-4199
[112]
Shen W-S, Salemi B, Will B (2002) “Hormone-inspired
adaptive communication and distributed control for CONRO
self-reconfigurable robots” IEEE Trans Robotics & Automation
18 (5), 700-712
[113]
Franks N & Deneubourg J-L (1997) “Self-organising nest
construction in ants: individual worker behaviour and the nest’s
dynamics” Animal Behaviour 54, 779-796
[114]
Klavins E (2007) “Programmable self-assembly” IEEE
Control Systems Magazine (Aug), 43-56
[115]
Stoy K (2006) “Using cellular automata and gradients to
control self-reconfiguration” Robotics & Autonomous Systems
54, 135-141
[116]
Schmickl T, Thenius R, Strader J, Hamann H, Crailsheim
K (2011) “Robotic organisms – artificial homeostatic hormone
system and virtual embryogenesis as examples for adaptive
reaction-diffusion controllers” Intelligent Robotic Systems
Workshop – Reconfigurable Modular Robotics: Challenges of
Mechatronic & Bio-Chemo-Hybrid Systems (ed. Kernbach S,
Fitch R)

IAC-19- D4.1.4x49787

[117]

Klavins E (2007) “Programmable self-assembly” IEEE
Control Systems Magazine (Aug), 43-56
[118]
Mondada F, Gambardella L, Floreano D, Nolfi S,
Deneubourg J-L, Dorigo M (2005) “Cooperation of SwarmBots” IEEE Robotics & Automation (Jun), 21-28
[119]
Gross R, Dorigo M, Yamakita M (2006) “Self-assembly of
mobile robots: from swarm-bot to super-mechano colony”
Intelligent Autonomous Systems 9 (ed. Arai T), IOS Press,
Tokyo, Japan, 487-496
[120]
Lee K, Moses M, Chirikjian G (2008) “Robotic selfreplication in structured and adaptable environments” Int J
Robotics Research 27 (3-4), 387-401
[121]
Okubo A (1986) “Dynamical aspects of animal groupings:
swarms, schools, flocks and herds” Advances in Biophysics 22,
1-94
[122]
Donahue B (1999) “Self-assembling transfer vehicles for
human Mars missions” J Spacecraft & Rockets 36 (4), 599-602
[123]
Lay O & Blackwood G (?) “Formation flying
interferometry” reprint
[124]
LoBosco D, Blaurock C, Chung S-J, Miller D (2005)
“Integrated modeling of optical performance for the Terrestrial
Planet Finder structurally connected interferometer” reprint
[125]
Beni G & Wang J (1991) “Theoretical problems for the
realization of distributed robotic systems” Proc IEEE Int Conf
Robotics & Automation, 1914-1920
[126]
Shen W-M, Will P, Khoshnevis B (2003) “Self-assembly
in space via self-reconfigurable robots” Proc IEEE Int Conf
Robotics & Automation, pp. 2516-2521
[127]
Shen W-S, Salemi B, Will B (2002) “Hormone-inspired
adaptive communication and distributed control for CONRO
self-reconfigurable robots” IEEE Trans Robotics & Automation
18 (5), pp. 700-712
[128]
Sanderson A (1984) “Parts entropy methods for robotic
assembly system design” Proc IEEE Int Conf Robotics &
Automation, pp. 600-608
[129]
Kurokawa H, Tomita K, Kamimura A, Kokaji S, Hauo T,
Murata S (2008) “Distributed self-reconfiguration of M-TRAN
III modular robotic system” Int J Robotics Research 27 (3-4),
373-386

Page 16 of 16

