Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Planetary and Space Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pss

Sustainable in-situ resource utilization on the moon
Alex Ellery
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Lunar in-situ resource utilization
Metalysis FFC process
3D printing
Lunar industrial ecology

We propose that current in-situ resource utilization schemes based on mining of water resources on the Moon is
unnecessary and unsustainable. Life support systems are capable of recycling with high efﬁciency. Burning of
hydrogen propellant and oxygen is akin to the burning of fossil fuels. The value of in-situ resources will be in
exploiting the resources that are abundant, husbanding of resources that are not and recycling as much as possible
to minimise waste. We propose that a closed loop industrial ecology must be implemented with extensive recycling loops as a sustainable approach to in-situ resource utilization on the Moon. We must build in sustainability
into our forays from Earth in order not to continue to make the same mistakes as we have on Earth.

1. Introduction
There are several signiﬁcant lunar missions on the books despite the
failure of the Google Lunar X-Prize of $40 M prize money to deliver a
privately-funded rover onto the Moon and drive 0.5 km by 2018.
Nevertheless, the two major competitors, Moon Express and Astrobotic,
and newcomer Blue Origin are active with plans to develop lunar assets
privately. More ambitiously, SpaceX has a plan to send two fee-paying
tourists around the Moon using the Falcon Heavy rocket and the
Dragon capsule in 2023. There are also several planned governmentfunded lunar missions in the near-term. NASA’s efforts are focussed on
the Deep Space Gateway, a space station in lunar orbit that will support
astronauts to direct robotic assets on the lunar surface. Eventually, it will
be expanded to include a lunar surface base, most likely at the lunar south
pole. ESA’s Moon Village is a human-robotic lunar infrastructure similar
in concept to international Antarctic bases to meet multiple government
and private sector goals (Crawford, 2017). From a purely scientiﬁc
viewpoint, the development of infrastructure to support a human
exploration programme can be exploited to facilitate scientiﬁc research
that cannot be undertaken otherwise (Crawford, 2001). The Moon
Village infrastructure would permit complex exploration activities
ranging from astrobiological investigation of buried samples from Earth
preserved in regolith to unique astronomical observations, especially
radio telescopy from the farside. Science however will not be the driver
for a Moon Village rather than strategic government and/or commercial
reasons. In any case, in-situ resources (ISRU) will be essential to ensure
sustainability on the Moon. The joint Russian/European Luna 27 mission
purports to demonstrate ISRU techniques and bears many similarities to
the recently cancelled American Lunar Resource Prospector mission

(Andrews et al., 2014). The Lunar Resource Prospector mission was
based on the RESOLVE (regolith and environmental science and oxygen
and lunar volatiles extraction) instrument payload which employed a
neutron spectrometer and near-IR spectrometer to map the surface distribution of hydrogen in the soil, extract a 1m long core sample using a
drill/auger system, heat the samples through 100–473 K to evolve core
volatiles in the OVEN (oxygen and volatile extraction node) system,
measure the volatile constituents using the LAVA (lunar advanced volatile analysis) system, further heat the samples through 473–1173 K in the
OVEN system to extract oxygen from regolith through hydrogen reduction, and condense a water sample. The European payload will similarly
comprise a drill to acquire water ice, regolith and volatiles from the
subsurface to a depth of 2m and analyse them with a similar ISRU
payload (a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer).
Despite this interest in in-situ water resources – which we deﬁne as
shallow ISRU in that it requires minimal processing for extraction - we
view this obsession as both unsound and unsustainable. The only proposed consumable production process that can be considered renewable
by virtue of its abundance is the extraction of oxygen from abundant
minerals. We are concerned with deep ISRU which seeks to develop a
lunar infrastructure. The ﬁrst objective of deep ISRU is to provide as close
to 100% supply from in-situ resources. The second objective is to
construct a 100% closed cycle industrial ecology extraterrestrially. Both
objectives are driven by the high cost of supply by launch from Earth.
This is a statement of sustainable space exploration which is built on two
pillars: (i) dematerialisation through the minimisation of material consumption, and (ii) detoxiﬁcation of waste. Industrial ecology addresses
detoxiﬁcation of waste by converting it into resources. The IPAT equation
quantiﬁes the impact I to be minimised: I¼PAT where P ¼ population of

E-mail address: aellery@mae.carleton.ca.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2020.104870
Received 30 April 2019; Received in revised form 5 December 2019; Accepted 10 February 2020
Available online 21 February 2020
0032-0633/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

industrial products produced by deep ISRU, A ¼ cumulative resource
units consumed per product produced (speciﬁc mass), T ¼ impact per
resource unit consumed (amount of waste). To reduce A requires
dematerialisation and to reduce T requires detoxiﬁcation. Industrial
ecology seeks to reduce impact T through recycling. Industrial ecology
minimises the waste of one process by feeding it as input to other processes. The Metalysis FFC Cambridge process is central to the minimisation/detoxiﬁcation of waste by its yield of high purity metal without
toxic reagents. It is of course highly desirable to achieve 100% closed
loop recycling. A self-replication capability would enforce minimisation
of A through both material and energy closure (Ellery, 2016a). Furthermore, there is a requirement in industrial ecology for cradle-to-cradle
sustainability which requires recycling at end-of-life. Metal 3D printing
minimises waste in the form of swarf by recycling 3D printed powder
feedstock. Industrial ecology must be built into space exploration goals
upfront as a fundamental design requirement rather than as an ad hoc
afterthought, in much the same way as planetary protection procedures
are built into robotic exploration missions (Debus, 2001). In the context
of deep ISRU, we consider one of the most important factors is to minimise the infrastructure required to extract materials from lunar resources
(ﬁrst objective). Simultaneously, the material set extracted must provide
full functionality for a diverse range of applications required for the
construction of infrastructure such as the capacity for space
manufacturing.

resources but these are (with the exception of O and to a lesser extent H)
either relatively or extremely rare in the lunar environment and will
require careful husbandry; (viii) the advent of sophisticated artiﬁcial
intelligence techniques offers the prospects of robotic construction of a
lunar industrial infrastructure without reliance on a human presence on
the surface, though the Deep Space Gateway offers the prospects for
direct teleoperation of robotic devices on the lunar surface from orbit.
The provision of surface robotic facilities offers high prospects for surface lunar infrastructure development through ISRU. Remote teleoperation may be applied to mining operations but even short time
delays effectively forbid telepresence (Lynas and Horberry, 2011).
Automation offers high reliability, efﬁciency and accuracy compared
with humans who suffer from limited vigilance – human error – but it
suffers from a lack of ﬂexibility to unanticipated problems. Furthermore,
human supervisors, lacking situational awareness due to automation,
become deskilled over time to deal with such events. In particular,
automated alarms can induce sensory and cognitive overload to human
supervisors. It will be essential therefore to engage automation of high
capability – artiﬁcial intelligence – with the ﬂexibility to deal with novel
events to eliminate the requirement for human supervision. In terrestrial
mining, there have been three waves of automation: (i) driverless rail
transport and automated drilling; (ii) remotely operated underground
ore extraction; (iii) remotely controlled load-haul machines. Today, a
fourth wave of automation is occurring – the development of autonomous mapping capability in load-haul-dump vehicles, technologies that
have been developed for the next-generation of planetary rovers. The
chief concern is that the Deep Space Gateway will divert efforts and
funds into the manned orbital elements to the detriment of the robotic
surface elements of the programme. We envisage that ISRU is not
necessarily tied with human missions and can be achieved robotically.
Current approaches have focussed on simplicity of water extraction
without consideration of the infrastructure required to support this. I
would argue the complexity of attempting to extract water from the
poles is just as complex as our proposed lunar industrial ecosystem, e.g.
beaming reﬂected solar energy from vast mirrors at peaks of eternal
light to solar arrays in permanently shadowed craters ~20 km away as
proposed by JPL (Stoica, 2019). This is necessary to obviate the need for
mining rovers to traverse the extremely rugged SPA terrain over 20 km
or so distances and 11 km or so elevations between permanently
shadowed craters where the resources reside and peaks of eternal light
where human bases must reside. Nevertheless, the general
manufacturing capabilities that we propose can support human missions
in a far more robust manner – major elements of lunar infrastructure can
be constructed robotically in preparation for human arrival from robotic
machines to thermal and electrical power supplies for electromagnetic
launchers, habitat structures, etc.

2. Deﬁciencies in current approaches
2.1. Why water?
Exploitation of local in-situ resources has high potential to reduce
the mass, cost and risk of exploration missions. Current interest in lunar
ISRU in order of increasing complexity is based on: (i) physical
extraction of indigenous water ice directly; (ii) thermal processing of
lunar volatiles to extract hydrogen; (iii) use of regolith processed into
civil engineering structures, and (iv) thermochemical or electrochemical
processing of lunar minerals to extract oxygen. The priority is to recover
water, hydrogen and oxygen as consumables to support human occupation – water for consumption, oxygen for respiration, and oxygen/
hydrogen as propellant/oxidiser. Indeed, the United Launch Alliance
has imposed a commercial price of $500/kg for 1100 Mtonnes of propellant per year on the lunar surface (https://www.hou.usra.edu/,
2017). NASA has declared that it requires 100 Mtonnes of propellant
per year for lunar launch vehicles (G Sanders, 2019 private communication). We believe that this approach is neither necessary nor sustainable for eight reasons: (i) oxygen and hydrogen requires cryogenic
freezing into liquid below 90 K for O2 and 20 K for H2 for long-term
storage (hydrogen peroxide may be directly metal-catalyzed as a
monopropellant but offers only a quarter of the speciﬁc impulse of
hydrogen/oxygen) unless stored in permanently shadowed craters at 40
K (suitable for passive O2 storage only); (ii) high recycling efﬁciency of
CELSS (closed loop environmental and life support systems) regarding
water and oxygen renders the need for indigenous sources marginal,
required only to replace leakage rather than as a primary supply; (iii)
the use of hydrogen and oxygen as propellant/oxidiser to be combusted
is wasteful of scarce resources (hydrogen in particular) akin to the
burning of oil on Earth which would be better employed for the in-situ
manufacture of plastics; (iv) propellant/oxidiser for surface operations
can be replaced by solar-electric power sources for rovers, etc; (v)
propellant/oxidiser for launch from the lunar surface can be replaced by
electromagnetic launchers that can readily reach escape velocity of
1.62 m/s2 (Kaye, 2005) supported by banks of solar-powered ﬂywheels
(Ellery, 2019a); (vi) sustainable lunar infrastructure may be effected
through the use of metals and other useful materials derived as a
side-effect of oxygen recovery from lunar minerals and thermal
extraction of volatiles; (vii) CHONPS (carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen
phosphorus and sulphur) constitute the most direct life-support

2.2. Importance of sustainability
The UN Conference on Environment and Development (1992) in Rio
deﬁned global environmental concerns and Agenda 21 called for product
lifecycle assessments regarding environmental impact as a step towards
sustainable development (https://sustainabledevelo). Although this
referred to Earth speciﬁcally, prudence dictates that we apply such
concerns to our ventures away from Earth. Product redesign must account for cradle-to-cradle lifecycle of products to implement sustainability. It has been proposed that exergy (energy available to be used to
perform work) is an appropriate measure of material and energy degradation and cycling (Connelly and Koshland, 1997). Unlike energy, exergy
is used up during processes involving temperature changes - it includes
entropy. At thermal equilibrium, exergy is zero. Closed cycle material
ﬂows require a continuous ﬂow of exergy to be sustainable. Open material ﬂow collapses into a state of thermal equilibrium, i.e. unsustainable. This is a consequence of the second law of thermodynamics. Most
materials, even that incorporated into products, eventually return to the
environment as waste. Industrial processes can be designed to minimise
2

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

absent on the Moon include calcite, micas/amphiboles, magnetite/
haematite and most sulphides (such as copper, zinc, selenium, lead, etc)
due to the lack of water.
Nanophase (np) iron Fe0, nanometre-scale particles of Fe ~15% by
weight, embedded in impact glass particles (Basu, 2005). Nanophase Fe0
forms from the vaporization of Fe oxide minerals such as ilmenite which
subsequently condensed as reduced metal globules due to the action of
solar wind hydrogen: FeO þ H2 → Fe0 þ H2O. Fe0-impregnated glasses
coat many mineral grains in the lunar regolith in a 50–150 nm thick layer
deposited by the condensation of impact-generated vapours. Magnetic
susceptibility of lunar soil increases with decreasing grain size due to the
greater fraction of nanophase Fe0. The reﬂectance spectra of these grains
indicate steep red slopes; reﬂectance spectra for ilmenite minerals by
contrast are relatively ﬂat over the visible range with a slight blue slope.
Although particles <10 μm particles are readily attracted by a simple
magnet, np-Fe0 are likely to be difﬁcult to extract because they are
conducting particles insulated by dielectric glass. Because their size is
less than the effective skin depth for microwave penetration, nanophase
iron is crucial to facilitating bulk microwave thermal processing of lunar
regolith (Taylor et al., 2005). It provides the prospect for rapid melting
(1000  C/min) at 1200  C due to good microwave coupling at 2.45 GHz.
Regolith melts over a range of temperatures 1373–1653 K due to its
different constituents.
The constraints on in-situ resources on the Moon are determined by
its mineral assemblage. The main minerals that can be exploited on the
Moon are ilmenite (FeTiO3), plagioclase feldspar anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8),
olivine ((Fe,Mg)2SiO4) and pyroxene ((Fe,Mg)SiO3). The ancient crustal
highlands representing the original crust are dominated by 70–95%
anorthosite (anorthosite comprises at least 90% anorthite mineral). The
more recent mare are basaltic outﬂows ﬁlling large impact basins primarily on the near-side and are more varied in nature with pyroxenes
(both orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene), 2–20% ilmenite, 0–20%
olivine and variable 10–40% plagioclase (mostly anorthite). The ilmenite
fraction varies from 1 to 6% (low Ti) to >6% (high Ti). The diversity of
minerals in the mare regions favour these locations for ISRU. The relative
lunar elemental abundances are 45% O, 21% Si, 6–15% Fe, 5–13% Al,
8–10% Ca, 5% Mg and 6% Ti with all other minor elements – Cr, Mn, Na,
K, P and S – being signiﬁcantly under 1%. This suggests that it is most
appropriate to exploit the more abundant O, Si, Fe, Al, Ca, Mg and Ti in
lunar minerals unless ore bodies can be located. It has been declared that
there are no lunar ore bodies but in fact, ore bodies do exist on the Moon
but they are not indigenous. It is expected that signiﬁcant quantities of
meteoritic material have survived impact on the Moon. In particular,
nickel-iron asteroid material may give rise to magnetic anomalies on the
Moon including on the northern rim of the farside South Pole Aitken
basin (remnant of a ~100 km diameter nickel-iron asteroid) (Wieczorek
et al., 2012). Indeed, it may be considered that lunar sources of asteroid
material are more easily exploited than those in Near-Earth Asteroid
populations (Ellery et al., 2018a). These resources are suitable sources of
secondary elements – reduced sources of Ni, Co, W and PGM (platinum
group metals) (Bland et al., 2008) which may be localized for ready access (Yue et al., 2013). There is even the prospect of the existence of
carbonaceous chondrite material on the Moon (Joy et al., 2016).
Although carbon is considered highly depleted on the Moon, it is
depleted by only 2 times compared with Earth soil.
KREEP-rich (potassium - rare earth elements - phosphorus) basalts are
primarily located at Oceanus Procellarum and the Imbrium Basin in the
northwest nearside (so-called Procellarum KREEP Terrain). There are
signiﬁcant differences between the abundances of rare elements associated with KREEP than on Earth (Warren and Wasson, 1979). Potassium is
severely depleted on the Moon ~30 times in comparison to Earth while
phosphorus is depleted by only ~2 times. Sodium is depleted compared
to Earth due to the lack of albite and this sodium is restricted primarily to
KREEP basalts. Hence, the amount of Na in the regolith is minimal and
likely difﬁcult to access so we regard it as an Earth-supplied ingredient. It
is believed that KREEP results from urKREEP source minerals in the lunar

their impact on the environment. Material cycles can produce more durable products that can be upgraded and repaired later. The more materials are recycled, the less is dispersed into the environment. The
industrial ecology forms a hierarchy of industrial processes in which they
consume the waste products of each other without waste. The ﬂow and
transformations of industrial materials should form a metabolism within
the industrial economy (Ayres et al., 1998). This industrial metabolism
comprises a distributed set of physical processes that convert raw materials and energy into ﬁnal products and waste using human and
ﬁnancial capital. This is similar to biological organisms that ingest useful
material and energy to maintain their metabolic functions and also grow
and procreate whilst excreting degraded waste material. They convert
low entropy food into high entropy waste through the consumption of
energy. However, this waste is consumed by microbes which recycle this
material forming an ecosystem of inter-dependencies.
3. Lunar resources
The following summary of some of the properties of lunar regolith
originates from (French et al., 1991). Lunar regolith comprises fragments
of rock, minerals and glasses to a variable depth of 5–15 m in the older
highlands and 3–5 m in the younger mare regions. Lunar regolith cohesion C varies from 0.1 to 1.0 kPa and friction angle ϕ varies from 30 to
50 due to the high angularity of regolith particles. Lunar regolith has a
mean particle size of 40–130 μm (peaking at 60–70 μm) due to aeons of
meteoritic bombardment which would pulverise a 1 kg boulder within 10
My. Lunar soil rapidly becomes increasingly dense with depth due to
compaction from the aeons of micrometeoroid impacts reaching 90%
densiﬁcation at 30 cm depth (1.74 g/cm3) compared with under 30% at
the surface (1.58 g/cm3). Regolith formation is based on the conﬂicting
processes of impact fragmentation and agglutination. Micron-scale beads
of pyroclastic glass are ubiquitous throughout lunar regolith comprising
10–20% by volume. Glass results from silicate melts generated from
micrometeorite impacts which cement mineral grains into agglutinates.
There are many different types of lunar glass which come from two types
of origin – impact melting (high in siderophiles such as Fe, Ni, Co, W, Pt,
etc) and tectonic (high in both Mg and Ni) sources (Delano, 1986).
Silicate minerals are the major rock-forming minerals on both Earth
and the Moon. Pyroxene and feldspar are the major minerals in basalt
common to both Earth and the Moon. On Earth, these include olivines
and inosilicates such as pyroxenes, feldspars, quartz, micas, garnets, etc.
Silicates are common on the Moon but quartz (SiO2) is rare. Pyroxenes
are inosilicate minerals (XY(Si,Al)2O6 where X ¼ Ca, Na, Fe2þ and Mg,
Y– Cr, Al, Fe3þ, Mg, Mn, Sc, Ti, V). They are silica-poor unlike amphiboles which are silica-rich so only pyroxenes are common on the Moon.
Enstatite (MgSiO3–FeSiO3) is a pyroxene that is common in stony and
iron meteorites and has been detected around stars. Feldspars are silicates that are richer in Al than pyroxenes – they form a silicate series
ranging through KAlSi3O8 (orthoclase) - NaAlSi3O8 (albite) - CaAl2Si2O8
(anorthite). Plagioclase feldspars refer to sodic and calcic feldspars.
Albite is silicate-rich while anorthite is silica-poor so it is the latter that is
dominant on the Moon, i.e. lunar plagioclases have lower Na content
than terrestrial plagioclases while the silicate content of lunar and
terrestrial plagioclase, pyroxene and olivine are similar. Olivine is a
Mg–Fe silicate ((Mg2þ,Fe2þ)2SiO4) which forms a solution series – forsterite (Mg2SiO4) to fayalite (Fe2SiO4) – which vary in their proportions
of Fe and Mg. Mg-rich olivine occurs on the Moon, Mars, meteorites,
asteroids, and comets. Around 1–2% of lunar regolith comprises orthoclase feldspar and other oxides including spinels (such as pleonaste),
chromite, rutile, calcium phosphate (apatite), zircon, troilite (iron sulphide) and free iron. Other minor oxide minerals include armalcolite
with the general formula XYO5 such as Mg0.5Fe0.5TiO5. Cr is more
abundant (up to 0.5%) as an impurity in lunar olivines than in terrestrial
olivines so we have not targeted Cr as an extractable resource. Garnets in
returned lunar samples are reckoned to be the result of contamination
rather than indigenous. Common terrestrial (hydrous) minerals that are
3

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

space nuclear fusion propulsion if cryogenic storage is feasible (at <4 K).
There exists water of hydration in minerals at all latitudes but this will
be more difﬁcult to extract than water ice. Water ice appears to reside in
permanently shadowed craters at the lunar poles at temperatures ~40 K,
facilitated by the fact that the sun never appears more than 1.5 above
the horizon. The LCROSS (2009) impact into the Cabeus crater yielded a
water concentration of 5.6  2.9% by mass. Over a total area of over
31,000 km2 of permanently shadowed area, this yields potential water
deposits of 3 x 1012 kg. However, Chandrayaan-1 detected at least 40
shadowed craters at the north pole with a capacity for 6  1012 kg water
ice there alone. It is nevertheless questionable how technologically
accessible 40 K water ice might be - rover traverses into permanently
shadowed craters and the drilling of rock-like ice present certain technological challenges. In order to provide power to the permanently
shadowed regions, heliostats may be employed to reﬂect sunlight from
peaks of eternal light into the shadowed depths – across many kilometres
both vertically and horizontally. Three such heliostats can remotely heat
surface ice directly or illuminate photovoltaic arrays to generate electrical energy. Water ice can be accessed through bulk heating and the
capture of sublimed water vapour in cold traps within an enveloping
canopy. It is unclear if there is surface ice which can be released by direct
heating of loose surface regolith. Dense regolith overlying buried water
ice prevents surface heat being transmitted to depth due to thermal
insulation by the regolith. This requires the drilling of boreholes to depth
into which heaters are inserted to access subsurface ice. However, the
consumption of in-situ water to be burned as propellant/oxidizer is
analogous to the burning of fossil fuels on Earth. It is not sustainable and
denies those resources to future generations. Furthermore, the extraction
of scarce volatiles such as carbon and nitrogen in the process of extracting
water ice should be recovered – not to do so would be analogous to the
burning off of natural gas during oil drilling that was normal practice on
Earth, a process that wantonly wasted resources valuable to future generations. In a more extreme case, lunar 3He will be released with water –
while its use as fuel for nuclear fusion energy appears remote today, it
must surely behove us to recover it for future generations rather than
wasting it while recovering water.

mantle with an average REE concentration of 1200 ppm dominated by
yttrium and cerium at 300 ppm each, dropping in concentration to 3–5
ppm for europium. This is about 5 times higher than the average abundance on Earth, and indeed, over two orders of magnitude higher than on
asteroids. For economic mining on Earth, concentrations of >1000 ppm
are required (Castor and Hedrick, 2006), but this will not be such a
constraint on the Moon where lower abundances will be tolerable.
However, like on Earth, there are likely to be higher concentrations on
the Moon. They can be traced through gamma ray detection due to their
association with U and Th with a roughly constant ratio U/Th ~0.27 and
average U concentration of ~2–5 ppm (10–20 ppm local peak). However,
the challenges of extracting rare earth elements from KREEP minerals
despite their high utility renders this too technologically difﬁcult for a
ﬁrst generation ISRU infrastructure due to their similar physical and
chemical properties (Jordens et al., 2013).
Ilmenite is the mineral with the highest concentration of solarimplanted volatiles ~50–80 ppm H, ~100–120 ppm C, ~80–100 ppm
N, ~10 ppm He, etc (Table 1).
Due to gardening of the regolith over the aeons, it is expected that
concentrations of volatiles are approximately constant to a depth of 2–3
m. Recovery of volatiles is through heating to 700  C which releases
almost all H, He and CO2 but higher temperatures are required for other
species such as CO (up to 1200  C). Subsequent fractional distillation is
enabled by the wide separation between condensation temperatures of
molecular species – He (4.2 K), H2 (20 K), N2 (77 K), CO (81 K), CH4 (109
K), CO2 (194 K) and H2O (373 K), It has been estimated that heating
regolith from its ambient 20  C–720  C requires 900 J/kg/oC or 109 J/
m3 (Crawford, 2015) Carbon is a particularly valuable commodity but
fortunately carbon is one of the more abundant volatiles (though still
scarce compared to mineral inventories). The scarcity of N in lunar volatiles renders the manufacture of hydrazine (N2H4) and nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) as unviable as propellants but small amounts of nitrogen
will be required. Noble gases Ne and Ar which might be extracted as
propellant for ion engines are highly rariﬁed at <1 ppm (Kr and Xe are
even rarer). 3He is often touted as a nuclear fusion fuel (Dþ3He→4He þ
pþ18.4 MeV) – 3He is very rare on Earth but D is abundant in seawater
(D/H ¼ 1.6 x 104). 3He is still rariﬁed in lunar regolith at 4 ppb
(average) up to 10 ppb (peak measured) or 20 ppb (peak estimated in
mature high-Ti mare regolith) exceeding terrestrial concentrations.
Assuming the highest concentration is recovered across the 2  106 km2
of the high-Ti Mare Tranquillitatis and Oceanus Procellarum to a depth of
3 m, this yields a total lunar inventory of 2  108 kg 3He. Given that
nuclear fusion has yet to be commercially developed even with the much
lower ignition energy DT reaction, the prospect for 3He-based nuclear
fusion appears remote. However, the extraction of any volatiles will also
release 3He – there is the thorny question of whether such scarce resources should be husbanded for future generations (which would
require extreme cryogenic storage) rather than squandered as boil-off.
Assuming 20 ppb 3He in mature high-Ti mare basalt-derived regolith,
processing of 40 m2 at 1 m depth (3.5 m radius circle) yields 1g 3He
(compared with the release of 8.2 kg of carbon) while an area of 40 km2
(3.5 km radius circle) yields a metric tonne of 3He. Given the potential
value and scarcity of 3He reserves, it would be best reserved for future

4. Demandite, sustainability & lunar ecology
4.1. Demandite
There are many critical issues that we do not address in detail here
such as reduced gravity, dust mitigation, radiation, etc as they are generic
to all lunar activities, not just ISRU – although such issues will have to be
addressed at some stage. The simplest problem is deal with is the exposed
radiation environment to which carbon-backbone plastics are sensitive
(replace with silicone plastics with Si–O backbones) and solid state
electronics are highly sensitive (replace solid state transistors with vacuum tubes). Partial gravity represents an open problem – gravity is
required to support almost all lunar operations but partial gravity is
evidently preferable to microgravity exhibited in space stations. Lunar
operations affected include: (a) rover traction which is partly dependent
on vehicle weight according to Bekker-Wong terramechanics though this
can be partially compensated through tracked chassis designs such as the
elastic loop mobility system (Ellery, 2005); (b) regolith bulldozing blades
for site levelling and regolith acquisition using excavators (Wilkinson and
DeGennaro, 2007) such as employed by the Kapvik microrover (Qadi
et al., 2012); (c) drilling to acquire subsurface raw materials which is
typically dependent on weight-on-bit (though the bio-inspired drill based
on the woodwasp ovipositor mechanism substantially reduces the
requirement for weight-on-bit (Gao et al., 2007); (d) density separation
methods of beneﬁciation (Avchare et al., 2014) which may require the
implementation of centrifugal separators; (e) 3D printing processes
which involve either material extrusion (such as fused deposition
modelling but this problem has been resolved in microgravity (Snyder
et al., 2013)) or powder beds (such selective laser sintering/melting)

Table 1
Concentration of solar wind-emplaced volatiles in lunar regolith (Crawford,
2015).
Volatile
species

μg/g)

Mass/m3 regolith (g) assuming 1660 kg/
m3 density

H
3
He
4
He
C
N
F
Cl

46  16
0.0042  0.0034
14  11
124  45
81  37
70  47
30  20

76
0.007
23
206
135
116
50

Concentration (ppm/

4

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

production rather than the product itself – indeed, this affords enormous
reductions in cost by maximising leverage from the lunar environment
(Ellery, 2017a). Furthermore, given that we are implementing a universal
constructor, the capacity to build desired products are a side effect of this
approach. A spacecraft is simply a speciﬁc variation of the more general
robotic machine.
Indeed, this approach suggests that we must be able to build
manufacturing facilities which we deﬁne here to be 3D printers supported by suites of robotic devices from manipulators for assembly to
construction vehicles for mining. In effect, we are leveraging lunar resources to build a universal construction mechanism (Moses et al., 2014)
– this production machine is a factory which comprises an assemblage of
kinematic machines. In fact, self-replication is a special case of universal
construction (Ellery, 2016c). The general assumption has been that ISRU
must proceed in well-deﬁned stages, though some can proceed in parallel: (i) resource site surveying – there are no ores on the Moon but there
are metal-rich minerals; (ii) proof-of-concept ISRU demonstration; (iii)
scalable pilot plant; (iv) full-scale production. Resource site surveying
and proof-of-concept ISRU can proceed in parallel. Furthermore, in a
self-replicating machine implementation, the scalable pilot plant replicates itself into full-scale production so that the two phases are merged.
This considerably shortens the development time into only two phases:
(i) self-replication module development; (ii) self-replication operations.
The advantage that self-replication provides is that it amortises the initial
capital cost of launching from Earth and delivering to the Moon the ﬁrst
self-replicating factory unit over subsequent generations of units leveraged in-situ on the Moon (Ellery, 2017b).
An important consideration for closing the self-replication cycle is to
minimise the types of material to be mined, minimise the types of
chemical processing techniques required, the types of manufacturing
techniques required and minimise the amount of assembly required. A
variety of chemical/electrolytic processes for lunar minerals have been
explored, all offering different yields – thermal reduction by hydrogen,
thermal reduction by carbon or methane, carbochlorination, molten
regolith electrolysis, solid state electrolysis, vacuum/vapour phase pyrolysis and HF/H2SO4 acid dissolution. For example, molten regolith
electrolysis at 1400–1600  C may reduce different geological materials.
Electrolysis of speciﬁc lunar minerals - anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8), olivine
((Mg,Fe)2SiO4), pyroxene (Ca(Fe,Mg)Si2O6), chromite (FeCr2O4) and
ilmenite (FeTiO3) – yield reduced molten material at the cathode and
oxygen at the anode. Here, we adopt the Metalysis FFC process as the
core chemical processing technique (Ellery et al., 2017a). For
manufacturing, we adopt 3D printing as the core manufacturing process
which minimises the amount of assembly required. For universal construction, we require a handful of materials derived from lunar sources,
speciﬁcally to build the key components common to all kinematic machines – motors, electronics and sensors (Ellery, 2016d). Our demandite
requires a minimal set of functional materials derivable from the Moon –
tensile and compressive structures (wrought iron and aluminium), elastic
structures (steel springs/ﬂexures and silicone elastomers), hard structures (alumina), thermal conductors (kovar and nickel), thermal insulation (silica ﬁberglass), high thermal tolerance (tungsten and alumina),
electrical conductors (aluminium, nickel and kovar), electrical insulation
(ceramics, fused silica glass, silicone plastics and silicon steel), active
vacuum tube electronics (nickel, kovar, tungsten, calcium oxide and
fused silica glass), magnetic materials (cobalt-ferrite, alnico, silicon steel
and permalloy), sensory transducers (aluminium resistance wire, quartz
and selenium), optical structures (aluminium/nickel and fused silica
glass), lubricants (silicone oil) and adhesives (silicone cement and
thermite).

which may be tolerant of reduced gravity or replaced with wire-based
systems (such as electron beam additive manufacturing – see later).
Lunar dust is ubiquitous and pervasive and adheres to everything due
to its frictional and electrostatic properties. Dust particles h ave an
average aspect ratio of 0.7 and exhibit angular jagged shapes making
them highly adhesive. They are levitated by solar ultraviolet radiation
during the day and by solar wind ﬂux during the night (Horanyi et al.,
1998). Dust settles and adheres through van der Waal forces onto solar
arrays, thermal radiators and optical surfaces. Dust mitigation techniques
may be achieved through several mechanisms – vibromechanical,
(electro)magnetic and electrostatic removal. Although magnetic approaches are simple (Eimer and Taylor, 2007), electrostatic approaches
are favoured as the most effective (Landis and Jenkins, 2002; Calle et al.,
2008; Clark et al., 2007). We have conducted successful experiments
using a set of carbon nanotube/polymer composite parallel plates
implementing electrostatic deﬂection of dust as part of an electrostatic
dust curtain (Kruzelecky et al., 2011). Moving mechanical parts such as
motors are particularly prone to dust invasion - rotor/stator airgap,
motor alignment, brush/commutator wear, gearing friction and meshing,
sheave seating, connector coupling integrity, bearings, etc. Rotary seals
require ﬂuid lubrication usually hydrocarbon oil of low viscosity and
good thin ﬁlm adhesion (which may be replaced by silicone oil) to
minimise friction and wear while dry lubricants such as PTFE seals have
high temperature and chemical stability. However, PTFE o-ring seals
have been tested and found to be inadequate for high dust environments
(modelled using angular silica dust) (Lauer and Allton, 1992). Magnetic
ﬂuid rotary seals can be used in a vacuum offering zero leakage (Cong
and Shi, 2008). Two opposing magnets create a magnetic circuit and
contain a ferroﬂuid, a colloidal suspension of paramagnetic particles of
10 nm diameter within a ﬂuid (water or oil). The nanoparticles impart
paramagnetic behaviour to the ﬂuid as a whole controlled by the application of magnetic ﬁelds rendering ferroﬂuids ideal for rotary seals in
motors. If nanophase iron could be extracted from lunar minerals and
dispersed in a ﬂuid such as silicone oil, ferroﬂuids could be manufactured
in-situ for dust seals.
Most proposals for ISRU are concerned only with the supply of consumables such as water, oxygen and hydrogen in which other substances
are either side-products or waste. This is unsustainable and will consume
scarce resources unnecessarily when there are alternative solutions that
do not require this because limitless solar energy is available. For
instance, consumption of H2/O2 propellant/oxidiser can be eliminated by
employing solar-powered rovers for transport (Ellery, 2016b) and electromagnetic launchers for launch (Kaye, 2005). An important aspect of
sustainability is to ensure that our use of the environment does not
degrade it for future generations. To build an industrial infrastructure on
the Moon, we must begin with an assessment of the resources required –
this is the demandite concept. We adopt the approach here of an industrial ecology comprising a series of interlocking networks of industrial
ecosystems which are embedded in the natural global ecosystem (Patel,
1992). Material and energy circulate through this network to enhance
self-sufﬁciency with respect to the natural environment. It involves tight
coordination of the inter-relationships between industrial facilities to
optimize the use of resources with minimal waste. This forms an internal
industrial metabolism of interlocking material and energy ﬂows. In a
lunar context, it requires a near-closed loop system of process ﬂows with
integrated recycling loops to minimise waste (Ellery, 2018a). We cannot
simply transport terrestrial technology to extraterrestrial environments
wholesale as they require the pre-existing global infrastructure on Earth
to support it. For instance, in the 1980s, computer chips were constructed
from just 12 elements which had increased to 16 by the 1990s, thence to
60 elements by the latter part of the 2000s. Our approach must be to
minimise the range of materials that we exploit on the Moon and minimise the support required from Earth-imported materials. One approach
to our demandite is to focus on the products that we wish to manufacture
on the Moon – a generic spacecraft would be one possibility. A more
robust focus however is to determine how to build the means of

4.2. Industrial ecology
Hence, we are interested in mundane but widely utilitarian materials
including Fe, Ni, Co, Al, Si, etc as well as potentially useful materials such
as Ti metals (which would introduce Nitinol shape memory alloy into the
5

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

Sodium in the form of sodium carbonate (soda ash) is manufactured
from NaCl via the Solvay process through ammoniated brine:

functional material list). On Earth, most metal ores are oxides, sulphides
or silicates - sulphides are typically converted into oxides prior to oxide
reduction to metal (by roasting in oxygen) followed by roasting in
hydrogen to reduce the metal oxides. Similarly, some extraterrestrial
minerals will require preprocessing with reagents. Furthermore, in
terrestrial thermochemical processing, slag ﬂoats while the heaver metal
is tapped from below – such should still occur even in low gravity ﬁelds
like the Moon. For chemical processing, ﬂuidized bed vessels are
preferred as they allow continuous feeding of reagents and removal of
products without moving grates or seals. Fluidised beds require small
particle sizes of <0.5 mm maximum which can be imposed by physical
sieving of regolith without further crushing – however, we introduce 3D
printing methods which impose more stringent requirements on both
particle size and size distribution which will almost certainly entail
physical processing.
The lunar industrial ecology presented here requires the import of
NaCl from Earth for the manufacture of silicone plastics and piezoelectric
quartz from silica but it is a recycled reagent rather than consumed. Na
and Cl are scarce in both lunar and asteroidal sources which could
potentially impose limits on the productivity rate. Two such necessary
reagents are Na2CO3 and HCl which are produced by calcium carbonate
and nitric acid (derived from lunar volatile nitrogen) treatment of NaCl
respectively. This use of NaCl bears some resemblances to proposals to
use KF as an Earth-imported reagent (Landis, 2005). In this case, HF acid
leaching can chemically process lunar material by dissolving regolith into
ﬂuorides. New superacids are also capable of performing difﬁcult reactions at low temperatures, e.g. solid acid catalysts such as HF–SbF5,
CF3SO3H and FSO3H. However, this requires continuous supply of reagents from Earth. NaCl is more stable, safer and easier to handle and
process than KF. Many of the pre-processing methods presented here are
employed on Earth and should require modest adaptation to the Moon.
Chlorine is liberated from NaCl as hydrochloric acid through the action of nitric acid – this requires a nitrogen source. Nitrogen is a critically
scarce commodity as a lunar volatile but its use here is as a reagent so it
may be recycled. Nitrogen gas is the primary volatile form of nitrogen but
we require it to be in ammonia form to manufacture nitric acid. The
Haber-Bosch process ﬁxes N2 gas with H2 gas to yield NH3 at high
pressure 15–25 MPa and 400–500  C over a Fe catalyst supported by
CaO, SiO2 and Al2O3 promoters (promoters are sourced through anorthite processing described later):

NaCl þ NH3 þ CO2 þ H2O → NaHCO3 þ NH4Cl
2NaHCO3 → Na2CO3 þ H2O þ CO2 (calcination)
Ammonia is recycled using CaO sourced from anorthite processing
and CO2 is captured and recycled:
NH4Cl þ CaO → 2NH3 þ CaCl2 þ H2O
Overall reaction is given by: 2NaCl þ CaCO3 ↔ Na2CO3 þ CaCl2
CaCl2 is a source of Metalysis FFC process electrolyte to replenish
leakage losses. Alternatively, HCl from CaCl2 can be recovered for use as
a recycled reagent by reacting it with water vapour above 425  C:
CaCl2 þ 2H2O → Ca(OH)2 þ 2HCl
We regard slaked lime Ca(OH)2 as a non-toxic waste product (though
it has uses in water sewage treatment). So, slaked lime may be carbonated into calcium carbonate:
Ca(OH)2 þ CO2 → CaCO3 þ H2O
CaCO3 may be calcined into CaO at 1000–1100  C releasing CO2
which may be recovered and recycled:
CaCO3 → CaO þ CO2 (calcination)
This reconstitutes CaO used for the formation of ammonia in the
Solvay process. Sodium carbonate produced in the Solvay process is
required for two chemical processes:
(a) the melting of silica at 2000  C followed by seeding with Na2SiO3
at 350  C and 150 MPa to grow quartz crystals as a piezoelectric
sensor material – most sensor transducers including chemical
sensors are derived from pressure/force/acceleration measurements enabled by piezoelectrics:
Na2CO3 þ SiO2(i) ↔ Na2SiO3 þ CO2
Quartz manufacture involves the growth of crystals which imposes a
throughput time bottleneck of 40–80 days but very little will be required
and it may be prioritorised.

N2 þ 3H2 → 2NH3

(b) processing of iron selenide with sodium carbonate and oxygen
requires a saltpetre (KNO3) catalyst to yield the semiconductor
selenium which is photosensitive:

Nitric acid may be produced through the Ostwald process at
400–1000 kPa and 600–800  C:
4NH3 þ 5O2 → 4NO þ 6H2O

FeSe þ Na2CO3 þ 1.5O2 → FeO þ Na2SeO3 þ CO2

The usual Pt on Ni catalyst may be replaced with tungsten carbide on
nickel (MenningChen, 2010) consistent with lunar resources. Thence,
2NO þ O2 → 2NO2

In both cases, CO2 is recovered. The second phase requires the
manufacture of H2SO4 from sulphur volatiles (supplemented if necessary
by mineral sulphide sources especially meteoritic troilite). Sulphuric acid
may be sourced from sulphur dioxide gas:

3NO2 þ H2O → 2HNO3 þ NO

2SO2 þ O2 ↔ 2SO3

HNO3 (gas) is required to generate HCl (gas) from NaCl (solid)
yielding Chinese saltpetre NaNO3 (solid):

SO3 þ H2O → H2SO4

NaCl þ HNO3 → HCl þ NaNO3

Sulphuric acid is required for the deposition of selenium from sodium
selenite and the sulphuric acid is not consumed.

NaCl is reconstituted by processing with KCl from orthoclase processing described later:

Na2SeO3 þ H2SO4 → Na2O þ H2SO4 þ Se

KCl þ NaNO3 → NaCl þ KNO3

This yields the desired selenium. Recycling of the sodium may be
implemented by dissolution of the sodium oxide in water to yield NaOH:

Saltpetre (potassium nitrate) is used as a catalyst for iron selenide
processing as well as a stable form of potassium and nitrogen for husbanding nitrogen. Unfortunately, nitrogen volatiles are highly rariﬁed in
lunar regolith imposing a nitrogen limitation on the liberation of critical
reagents.

Na2O þ H2O → 2NaOH
The acid/base reaction reconstitutes NaCl:
NaOH þ HCl → NaCl þ H2O

6

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

has potential for coating of in-situ produced aluminium solar sails rather
than mylar.
A suite of metals is required to perform a variety of functions from
structural to electrical, magnetic and thermal processes. These hearthbased processes require elevated temperatures suggesting that the
dominant form of energy required for ISRU is thermal. This would imply
that solar concentrators such as Fresnel lenses and mirrors will dominate
the required energy supply. Chemical reduction of metal oxide minerals
implies the use of a chemical reducing agent such as hydrogen (hydrogen
reduction) or carbon compounds such as carbon monoxide or methane
(carbothermal reduction). It is energetically easier to release oxygen from
Fe oxide than most other metal oxides. Fe is also the most widely used
metal on Earth by virtue of its versatility of alloys. Ilmenite occurs in
concentrations of 10–25% by weight in Fe-rich mare basalts and contains
31.6% Ti and 36.8% Fe. The most commonly proposed lunar ISRU
technique is thermal reduction of the common lunar mare mineral
ilmenite at 1000  C using hydrogen (from electrolysed water) in a ﬂuidised bed:

This provides the basis for the manufacture of internal sensors
(piezoelectric) and external sensors (vision) that are required to support
closed loop feedback control systems in robotic machines (supplemented
by electromagnetic sensors).
The Moon possesses regolith volatiles including carbon that may be
used as raw material for the manufacture of plastics though the scarcity
of carbon suggests its careful husbandry. Polymers generally have inferior properties to metals: (i) moduli of elasticity of plastics falls in the
range 10 MPa - 4 GPa compared with 50–400 GPa for metals; (ii) tensile
strength of plastics is 10–100 MPa compared with up to GPa for metals;
(iii) plastics have low fracture strength compared to metals; (iv) plastics
have poor response to high temperatures and radiation compared with
metals due to reduced tensile strength and increased ductility. Hence,
metals are better suited to load-bearing, stiff structures while plastics are
best employed as elastomers for applications for which there is little
alternative, e.g. ﬂexible electrical insulation of wiring. To minimise the
consumption of carbon as a scarce resource, we have adopted silicone
(siloxane) oils (as lubricant) and plastics (as elastomers), especially for
ﬂexible electrical insulation (such as wire sheathing) for four reasons: (i)
speciﬁc hydrocarbon plastics require complex manufacturing reagents
and processes; (ii) the alternating Si–O backbone of siloxanes minimises
the consumption of scarce C volatiles which are incorporated only into
the side chains; (iii) silicone plastic is UV-radiation resistant; (iv) silicone
plastic has higher operational temperature tolerance (up to 350  C for
silicone compared with 120  C for hydrocarbon plastic) which can be
increased substantially with additives (350–500  C). Siloxane manufacture begins with the formation of syngas from lunar volatiles methane
and water at 850  C and 4 MPa over a Ni catalyst:

FeTiO3 þ H2 → Fe þ TiO2 þ H2O
Increasing the temperature to the melting point of Fe ~1600  C releases Fe by liquation. Water must be electrolysed into its constituents:
H2O → H2 þ ½O2 by electrolysis
The hydrogen is recycled while oxygen may be used to convert iron
into ferrite for magnets (Fe2O3/Fe2O3.CoO):
2Fe þ 1.5O2 → Fe2O3/Fe2O3.CoO

CH4 þ H2O → CO þ 3H2

Fe2O3.CoO is also magnetostrictive. FeO occurs in fractions up to 20%
in lunar glass – it may be oxidised into Fe2O3 by roasting at 600  C.
Magnetite (Fe3O4) may be formed by heating haematite (Fe2O3) to 1400

C. This may be used in a ferroﬂuid when suspended in water with silicone surfactant (Hill, 2002). Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanomaterials have
been proposed as electrodes for water-splitting in photosynthetic photovoltaics (Chen and Mao, 2007) but this represents a major challenge for
lunar application. However, Ti may be recovered from rutile (TiO2)
through the Metalysis FFC process. Ti with Ni offers the potential for
manufacturing the shape memory alloy NiTi (nitinol) which has a transition temperature of As ¼ 95  C and applied stress of 800 MPa at 2–3%
strain. This potentially introduces versatile options for distributed actuation in large structures (Lynch et al., 2016; Ellery, 2015). Steel alloy
typically comprises up to 2.1% C with a minimum melting temperature of
1130–1315  C - the addition of carbon reduces its melting point for ease
of casting. Higher than 2.1% C is cast iron – cast iron has a melting point
of 1375  C. Hence, the addition of carbon is not essential and wrought
iron on the Moon would not be subjected to rusting. Stainless steel
comprises a minimum of 11% Cr (usually with Ni) to resist corrosion
through the formation of a thin passive chromium oxide layer – this is
also not required in most extraterrestrial environments such as the Moon.
Although wrought iron is an effective structural material, there are a
number of steel alloys that offer functional capabilities with low carbon
content – tool steel (Fe–W alloy) for cutting tools such as milling heads,
silicon steel (up to 3% Si) for electromagnets and motor cores, kovar
(Fe–Ni–Co–Si alloy) for high temperature electrical wiring, permalloy
(Fe–Ni alloy) for magnetic shielding and ferrite for permanent magnets
(CoFe2O4). Si is a constituent in magnetically soft silicon steel for use in
electric motor cores - this introduces the possibility of manufacturing
electric motors in-situ. Steel alloy manufacture requires a range of
alloying materials, primarily from the signiﬁcant nickel-iron meteorite
deposits on the Moon (Ellery et al., 2018a) (Table 1). For instance, kovar,
a fernico alloy of Fe, Ni and Co can replace glass-compatible copper
conductors) with the Ni and Co sourced from NiFe asteroidal material
located at certain lunar crater rims.
Most meteorites are comprised of minerals based on eight major elements – oxygen, silicon, magnesium, iron, aluminium, calcium, sodium

CO is also required for the carbonyl (Mond) process described later
but it is not consumed. Syngas is converted to methanol (or higher
alcohol) at 250  C and 5–10 MPa over an alumina catalyst (sourced from
anorthite processing):
CO þ 2H2 → CH3OH
The alcohol formed determines the species of siloxane manufactured
(methanol yields polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), the simplest siloxane).
Methyl chloride is formed by the action of HCl on methanol at 340  C
over an alumina catalyst:
CH3OH þ HCl → CH3Cl þ H2O
Dimethyl dichlorosilane is formed from the reaction of methyl chloride with Si at 320–370  C and 1–5 bar in the presence of a catalyst
(Rochow process):
2CH3Cl þ Si → (CH3)2SiCl2
Ni can replace the more commonly used Cu catalyst in the Rochow
process as copper is not available on the Moon. Intriguingly, lunar dust
has been demonstrated as an effective catalyst for Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (Cabrera et al., 1976). Finally, the simplest silicone, the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), is formed by hydrolysis with water:
n(CH3)2SiCl2 þ nH2O → ((CH3)2SiO)n þ 2nHCl
HCl is released and recycled. Hence, silicone plastics may be manufactured from lunar volatiles given a source of Cl reagent, i.e. NaCl imported from Earth. The only alternative to the consumption of carbon in
silicone plastic is to convert silicone once deposited in-situ into silica by
ﬂash heating in oxygen – this burns off the carbon as CO2 for recovery
leaving silica ceramic insulation. Silica ceramic is of course brittle unlike
the viscoelastic silicone – it may be remarked that carbon volatiles are by
far the most common lunar volatile with the exception of hydrogen. Thin
<1000 μm PDMS membranes ~1 m in size have been 3D printed with
features sizes ~0.1 μm using direct laser printing (Low et al., 2017). This

7

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

and potassium – and several minor elements – sulphur, chromium,
phosphorus, carbon and titanium. The commonest minerals are pyroxene
(especially enstatite in stony meteorites), olivine (especially fayalite
except in E chondrites), plagioclase feldspar (especially anorthite with
albite being rare), kamacite (NiFe metal) and taenite (NiFe metal) with
lower incidences of troilite (FeS), schreibersite (FeNi)3P and cohenite
(Fe,Ni)3C. Chondritic meteorites generally comprise 10–30% native
metal but metallic asteroids comprise up to 99% ferrous metal alloy.
Silicate minerals – pyroxenes, olivines and feldspars – are dominant in
stony meteorites. Chromite FeCr2O4 is the commonest metal oxide in
ordinary chondrites. The alloy additives to steel – nickel, cobalt, tungsten
and selenium - may be sourced from in-situ nickel-iron meteorite material detectable as magnetic anomalies associated with impact craters.
Nickel-iron meteorites comprise primarily of kamacite/taenite Fe–Ni
metal alloy with signiﬁcant amounts of cobalt and microparticle inclusions of tungsten. Kamacite (4–7.5% Ni) and taenite (27–65% Ni) are
ferromagnetic NiFe alloys contaminated with ~0.5% Co constituting the
major constituent in nickel-iron meteorites. The metals are in a free metal
state of Fe–Ni–Co alloy with W micro-inclusions and troilite (FeS) contaminants. Direct melting of metal alloy will yield sub-optimal composition of ferrous steel enriched in nickel, cobalt and other minor metals.
The major metals Fe–Ni–Co may be puriﬁed through different carbonyl
(Mond) processes under mild conditions with a S catalyst. This involves
heating the metal alloy to up to 260  C under pressure in the presence of
CO gas to form gaseous metal carbonyls that can be fractionally distilled
to separate the different metals (Mond process). The carbonyl process has
different processing conditions for purifying different metals. For Ni, this
requires reacting CO with an S catalyst at 40–80  C and 1 bar to form
nickel carbonyl gas which is then reversed at 230  C and 60 bar while Fe
puriﬁcation requires different conditions:

applications. Mastery of the carbonyl (Mond) process on the Moon provides a ﬁeld demonstration of asteroid mining techniques in a more
benign environment (0.166g rather than milli-g gravity).
Alumina reduced to pure Al offers several multirole capabilities: (i)
structural metal; (ii) electrical wiring; (iii) reﬂective surfaces including
solar sails; (vi) high performance AlNiCo (8–12% Al, 15–16% Ni, 5–24%
Co, up to 6% Cu, up to 1% Ti and the rest being Fe) permanent magnets
(though some loss in strength is expected with the omission of Cu); (v)
thermite welding with iron oxide. The addition of Al to the manifest of
metals also permits the manufacture of AlNiCo for magnetically hard
materials. Aluminium metal - useful for both lightweight structural
purposes and electrically conductive wiring - is difﬁcult to extract from
the ubiquitous anorthite and requires pre-processing methods to yield
alumina (which is also difﬁcult to reduce) which itself has use as a refractory material in solar furnaces as well as a catalyst. Although bauxite
on Earth is the primary Al ore, anorthite has been used commercially as a
source of Al using a lime-soda process which yields alumina:
CaAl2Si2O8 þ 3CaCO3 þ Na2CO3 → 2NaAlO2 þ 2Ca2SiO4 þ 4CO2
A further series of processes are required to yield Al2O3 rendering this
too complex for lunar application. Fluidised bed carbochlorination of
anorthite at 770  C is another approach:
CaO þ Al2O3 þ 2SiO2 þ 8C þ 8Cl2 → CaCl2 þ 8CO þ2SiCl4 þ 2AlCl3

Fe(CO)5 ↔ 5CO þ Fe (175  C/100 bar)

Lunar highland mineral anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8) may be processed in
two ways to yield different products. The ﬁrst pathway involves carbothermal reduction at 1650–1860  C for 3 h to yield CaO used for
thermionic cathode coatings, Al2O3 as either feedstock for the FFC
Cambridge process for reduction to aluminium metal or as a hardy
ceramic (such as refractory crucible linings) and silicon metal for silicon
steel alloying:

Ni(CO)4 ↔ 4CO þ Ni (55  C/1 bar)

CaAl2Si2O8 þ 4C → 4CO þ CaO þ Al2O3 þ 2Si

Co2(CO)8 ↔ 8CO þ 2Co (150  C/35 bar)

Quicklime (CaO) is an alkali earth metal oxide coating applied to
tungsten in vacuum tubes to reduce its work function. It is required in
only small amounts. The CO may be recovered and recycled. Excess CaO
may be converted into slaked lime Ca(OH)2:

Co may be extracted similarly through the carbonyl process but under
different conditions. Alternatively, Co may be extracted by roasting with
S in oxygen to convert cobalt into cobalt sulphate which is soluble in
water. Co may then be extracted electrolytically. In all cases, CO may be
derived from lunar volatiles and should be recycled (it is not consumed).
The S catalyst can be derived from troilite (FeS) which is an accessory
mineral in almost all meteorites including NiFe meteorites often associated with pentlandite (Fe,Ni)9S8 and graphite. The release of the sulphur
catalyst involves roasting troilite in oxygen to release sulphur dioxide gas
which is then mixed with hydrogen sulphide gas at 750–1100  C over an
alumina catalyst (Claus process):

CaO þ H2O → Ca(OH)2
This has potential uses in cement production. Alternatively, excess
CaO may be reduced to Ca metal through the Metalysis FFC process
which is often proposed as an electrical conductor in vacuum – although
its conductivity by mass is superior to both copper and aluminium due to
its low density, it is not superior than either by volume. Hence, we favour
aluminium as the electrical conductor of choice.
The second pathway for anorthite involves artiﬁcial weathering using
HCl to yield a different set of products including silica (rather than Si
metal) for the production of fused silica glass. Glass particles are abundant in all lunar regolith with variable colour and refractive indices (lowrefractive index, lighter glasses with high Al content in the highlands and
higher refractive index, darker glasses with high Fe and Ti content in the
mare regions). Glasses often form agglutinates (25–30% of lunar regolith) comprising fragmented mineral grains in a glass matrix formed from
impact melts during micrometeoroid impacts. Melting regolith with
rapid cooling forms glass but such glass would be of poor quality. Natural
lunar glass is also unsuited to engineering applications. Foamed glass
may be formed for primary structure or glass/optical ﬁbres for composite
reinforcement. Electrospinning is an efﬁcient method of ﬁbre production
applicable to any soluble ﬁbre. Glass ﬁbre has a versatility of uses – glass
wool for thermal insulation, high strength/weight ratio for tensile applications, low coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and high electrical
insulation, and optical applications such as ﬁbre-optics. Glass may be
melted in a furnace, rapidly cooled and extruded or drawn mechanically
by winders through a metal bushing forming reinforcing glass ﬁbres.
Cooled molten regolith from 1450 to 1600  C may also form such glass

4FeS þ 7O2 → 2Fe2O3 þ 4SO2
SO2 þ H2S → 3S þ H2O
Meteoritic NiFe alloys are also enriched in W microparticle inclusions
at a concentration of 0.1–5 μg/g. Following grinding into particles, the
high density of W at 19.3 lends itself to extraction from the residue of the
Mond process by density. Separation of particle mixtures by speciﬁc
density may be achieved through centrifugal separation into concentrate
and gangue. In a hydrocyclone, a wet feed slurry enters a cyclone
tangentially. Centrifugal forces force heavier particles down a decreasing
conical diameter while ﬁne particles remain in the upper cylindrical
diameter. The low concentration of tungsten highlights the criticality of
this material but it is required only for the tips of tooling (tool steel) and
especially as the thermionic cathodic material for vacuum tube heating
elements. Ceramic-metal (cermet) composites offer high thermal tolerance and may be formed from tungsten and alumina powder. Selenium is
found in association with troilite with an S/Se ratio of ~2450 in meteorites making it rare. However, it is required only for photosensitive

8

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

ﬁbres (Tucker et al., 2006). If the glass ﬁbres are drawn through a
polyamide or silicone solution, they form an opaque coating to form
optical ﬁbres. Glass wool offers a much lower thermal conductivity


~0.04 W/m C than silica glass at 2 W/m C. For optical applications, glass
requires transparency. Note that soda ash (Na2CO3) and potash (K2CO3)
is used as inputs for making soda lime glass. Soda lime glass (71–73%
SiO2, 12–14% Na2O and 10–12% CaO) with its low melting point of
1000  C for ease of casting cannot be made on the Moon due to the
paucity of Na and imported Na from NaCl must be recycled rather than
consumed. Borosilicate glass (pyrex) with its higher melting temperature
of 1650  C is commonly used for chemical vessels for its inertness,
durability and heat tolerance. However, borosilicate glass is infeasible
because B2O3 is scarce on the Moon. The melting point of borosilicate
glass is close to that of fused silica (pure SiO2) with its melting point of
~1700  C. Aluminosilicate glass (52–60% SiO2, 15–25% Al2O3, 12%
MgO, 5–15% CaO, 4% B2O3, 1% NaO and 1% other oxides) has a melting
temperature of 1130–1350  C and may be approximated by lunar anorthosite (anorthite, pyroxene, olivine and ilmenite) especially anorthite
(CaAl2Si2O8) plus MgO less the minor constituents (Landis, 2007). Acid
leaching can remove undesirable components from the lunar soil.
Aluminosilicate glass is potentially reactive to oxygen-rich ﬁre (only to
be problematic in oxidation reactions). However, the moderate to high
FeO content in indigenously derived glass causes glass darkening which
is undesirable for transparency so it would have to be removed. This may
be accomplished through puriﬁcation of silica to which the other components may be added in the required proportions rather than forming
glass from anorthite. However, we assume that fused silica glass is
manufactured and exploited as it offers predictable properties and high
transparency for optics. Silica – which is rare on the Moon - is highly
desirable for the formation of fused silica glass for optical components, as
feedstock for the FFC Cambridge process to yield silicon for electrical
steel alloy and as a thermal insulation in ﬁbre form. SiO2 may yield fused
silica glass through simple heating at 1550  C while the anhydrous
conditions of the Moon generate higher tensile strength glass than on
Earth.
Hydrolysis is a common weathering process on Earth in which water
as a weak acid (carbonic acid due to dissolved carbon dioxide) can react
with silicate minerals. Hydrolysis may be implemented artiﬁcially using
stronger acids such as HCl. This eliminates the involvement of carbon, so
we propose the action of hot HCl on anorthite which is readily dissolved
in mineral acid through acid leaching (Veldhuyzen, 1995):

series, metals can displace any metal lower in the reactivity series, e.g.
2Al þ Fe2O3 → 2Fe þ Al2O3. This is the basis for the thermite reaction
that is used for welding steel or iron together using Al powder.
Aluminium is a particularly desirable metal for its diverse applications as
a lightweight structural material, as electrically conducting wiring, as
thermally conductive straps and as a metal joining agent.
Natural weathering on Earth offers insights into how further lunar
minerals might be processed substituting strong HCl for weak H2CO3 as a
form of artiﬁcial weathering. Chemical weathering of aluminosilicates
such as feldspar involves hydrolysis by weak carbonic acid (carbon dioxide dissolved in rainwater) forming the clay mineral kaolinite and silicic acid from which silica can be precipitated:
2KAlSi3O8 þ 2H2CO3 þ 9H2O → Al2Si2O5(OH)4 þ 4H4SiO4 þ 2Kþ þ
2HCO3Similarly, artiﬁcial chemical weathering of orthoclase with hot HCl
yields silicic acid and the clay mineral illite:
3KAlSi3O8 þ 2HCl þ 12H2O → KAl3Si3O10(OH)2 þ 6H4SiO4 þ 2KCl
Silica can be precipitated from silicic acid:
H4SiO4 → SiO2 þ 2H2O
From silica, both fused silica glass and quartz can be manufactured.
Illite can be further weathered into the clay mineral kaolinite which has
multiple uses such as porcelain, cement and mineral wool (for thermal
insulation and hydroponics):
2KAl3Si3O10(OH)2 þ 2HCl þ 3H2O → 3Al2Si2O5(OH)4 þ 2KCl
NaCl can be reconstituted from KCl using NaNO3 as described earlier.
Olivine may be subjected to carbothermal reduction at 2000  C to
yield Si and MgO. Alternatively, weathering of olivine is possible due to
the instability of olivine in hot water which is why olivine is rare
terrestrially:
Mg2SiO4 þ 4Hþ þ 4OH → 2Mg2þ þ 4OH þ H4SiO4
Both olivine end members yield useful materials including SiO2
ceramic:
3Fe2SiO4 þ 2H2O → 2Fe3O4 þ 3SiO2 þ 2H2O
Mg2SiO4 þ 4H2O→ 2MgO þ SiO2 þ 4H2O

CaAl2Si2O8 þ 8HCl þ 2H2O → CaCl2 þ 2AlCl3.6H2O þ 2SiO2
Silica is precipitated while CaCl2 and AlCl3 remain in solution and
must be precipitated separately through heating. The only waste is CaCl2
which re-supplies leakage losses in the FFC Cambridge process universal
electrolyte but the rest can be recycled into HCl and CaO as outlined
earlier. Aluminium choride hexahydrate may be heated to 100  C to yield
HCl which may be recycled yielding Al(OH)3:

Fayalite yields magnetite (ferrite) and silica while forsterite yields
magnesia and silica – the Moon’s olivine is dominated by forsterite. MgO
which can be reduced directly using the FFC Cambridge process to yield
magnesium metal - however, we do not recommend extracting magnesium metal from the oxide as it has a tendency to outgas in a vacuum
despite its potential utility in ultralightweight structures. Alternatively,
some MgO can be further reacted with HCl to yield MgCl2:

2AlCl3.6H2O → Al(OH)3 þ 3HCl þ 3H2O

MgO þ HCl → MgCl2 þ H2O
Dissolved MgCl2 salt in water mixed with MgO yields Sorel cement:

Hydrochloric acid and water are recycled. Precipitated aluminum
hydroxide may be in turn heated to 400  C yielding alumina (calcination
is another pathway to alumina):

5MgO þ MgCl2 þ 13H2O → 5 Mg(OH)2⋅MgCl2⋅8H2O
Sorel cement consumes chlorine so it would not be suitable as part of
a self-sustained industrial ecology but has been proposed as binder for 3D
printing regolith in the D-shape process (Cesaretti et al., 2014). My group
has already 3D printed casts in Sorel cement for casting different materials including sintered metal-impregnated clays (which are produced by
artiﬁcial weathering of pyroxene and orthoclase) and other binders using
our commercial universal extruder [unpublished results]. We do not
require Mg metal and other silicates yield silica. Hence, the processing of
olivine is not required.
On Earth, clinopyroxenes (e.g. augite and diopside) are more abundant than orthopyroxenes which are associated with olivine –

2Al(OH)3 → Al2O3 þ 3H2O
Filtration and washing yields silica purity in excess of 99%. Alumina
has highly desirable properties including high thermal tolerance and
high hardness that lend itself to the lining of thermal crucibles. Alumina
may also be subject to the Metalysis FFC process to yield elemental
aluminium as (a) an electrically conducting material; (b) a structural

material; (c) high thermal conductivity material of 200 W/m C (half that
of copper) suitable for thermal straps; (d) solar sail coating; (e) a
component of strong AlNiCo hard magnets. Aluminium can also be used
for joining. Since electronegativity corresponds to a reverse reactivity
9

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

beneﬁt is obtained by pre-processing of complex minerals into simple
oxides to yield elemental metals. The FFC process can reduce any oxide
into near-pure metal releasing O2. However, the graphite anode is
corroded by oxygen, forming CO/CO2. We have avoided the use of carbon compounds as consumed product and as consumed reagent (in the
case of sodium carbonate in quartz production and selenium extraction,
carbon is recycled from recovered CO2) because carbon volatiles in the
lunar regolith are scarce. This places a premium on recovering carbon:
for example, we may recover graphite anodes that are eroded as CO/CO2
during oxygen production in the Metalysis FFC process. First, any CO in
the CO/CO2 mix formed by the liberation of oxygen at the graphite anode
can be oxidised fully:

orthopyroxenes weather hydrothermally much more rapidly than clinopyroxenes so clinopyroxenes are more common on Earth. Clinopyroxenes
are also more abundant on the Moon such as Ca-rich augite but not due to
weathering. Lunar augite may be artiﬁcially weathered to yield Ca
montmorillonite, soluble silica and insoluble iron oxide:
Ca(Fe,Al)Si2O6 þ HCl þ H2O → Ca0.33(Al)2(Si4O10)(OH)2.nH2O þ H4SiO4 þ
CaCl2 þ Fe(OH)3
Montmorillonite is an expanding clay unlike illite and kaolinite.
Montmorillonite is the primary ingredient in bentonite which has multiple uses: (i) viscous agent in drilling mud; (ii) binder in sand casting green sand is sand mixed with bentonite clay and water; (iii) absorbent
material (montmorillonite and kaolinite) in Fuller’s earth cleaning agent;
(iv) feldspar and kaolinite may be supplemented by bentonite to form
pottery. We consider the utility of clay to be marginal unless deep drilling
is implemented (by default, we assume that raw materials is accessed on
the surface through open-cast mining). Similarly, meteoritic enstatite
may be rapidly artiﬁcially weathered:

CO þ 0.5O2 → CO2
The CO2 can be recycled through the Sabatier reaction at 300  C over
an Ni catalyst (sourced from nickel-iron meteorites):
CO2 þ 4H2 → CH4 þ 2H2O
Methane can then be pyrolytically cracked at 1400  C to yield
elemental carbon for graphite anode reconstitution:

Mg2Si2O6 þ HCl þ H2O → Mg3Si4O10(OH)2 þ H4SiO4 þ MgCl2.nH2O
This yields talc, silica and magnesium chloride. Talc is a waste
product that can potentially be used as a dry solid lubricant but its utility
is again marginal. Tungsten disulphide is more appropriate as a dry
lubricant that has higher temperature tolerance than the more widespread molybdenum disulphide – tungsten disulphide is manufactured by
depositing sulphur onto a tungsten substrate and heating at 300–400  C.
We discard processing of clinopyroxenes as unnecessary.
There are further processes that may be explored. Acid leaching with
dilute HCl can also release most of the rare earth elements from KREEP
deposits (Ellery et al., 2018b) but we do not address this further. However, in passing, we may propose that P may be extracted from the
mineral apatite (calcium phosphate Ca5(PO4)3(F,Cl,OH)) by warm HCl
leaching:

CH4 → C þ 2H2
This illustrates that the Sabatier reaction which is often proposed for
the conversion of Martian atmosphere CO2 into CH4 fuel (Ellery and
Muscatello, 2017) can be ﬁeld tested rigorously on the moon. The
American Mars 2020 rover will carry the MOXIE experiment to demonstrate the Sabatier process of extracting CH4 and O2 from the CO2 Martian
atmosphere and H2 extracted from water. In the Metalysis FFC process,
the sintered solid cathode, initially a metal oxide is converted into sintered pure metal with >99% purity which may be crushed and used
directly as powder feedstock for selective laser sintering – this was
demonstrated with rutile reduced to Ti metal by Metalysis (Ellery et al.,
2017b). The lunar ecology yields the demandite from which we can
manufacture a wide variety of functional capabilities using lunar
resources.

Ca5(PO4)3(F,Cl,OH) þ HCl → CaCl2 þ H3PO4 þ byproducts
4H3PO4 þ 16C → P4 þ 6H2 þ 16CO at 850  C

5. 3D printing techniques

Aluminium and phosphorus are potential p- and n-type dopants for
solar grade silicon for the manufacture of silicon solar cells. However,
apatite is relatively scarce on the Moon and control of dopant diffusion
requires exacting manufacturing conditions. This completes our inventory of lunar material processing of all major lunar minerals. It appears that processing of olivine and pyroxenes are superﬂuous to the
lunar industrial ecology which requires only volatiles, ilmenite, anorthite
and orthoclase and imported NaCl as raw materials. Mindful of the need
to employ sustainable approaches to ISRU (Ellery, 2018a), this lunar
industrial ecology can support a complete infrastructure with recycling
loops and minimal waste (Ellery et al., 2018c).

5.1. Universal construction by 3D printing
The introduction of rapid prototyping technology allows us to progress beyond the supply of consumables to the construction of complex
objects using processed materials with layered construction. The products of the lunar ecology constitute feedstock for 3D printing which
provides a general-purpose manufacturing technique without the waste
inherent in more traditional subtractive techniques. 3D printing involves
a suite of manufacturing technologies premised on the construction of 3D
parts additively layer-by-layer rather than subtractively such as turning
or milling. It permits complex geometries to be generated and reduces the
requirement for joining and assembly while almost completely eliminating material waste. Just as signiﬁcantly, it can be used to create
positive or negative moulds from which casts can be made for mass
production to overcome the seriality of 3D printing. Stereolithography
(SLA) was the ﬁrst 3D printing technique developed by Charles Hull in
1985. SLA is based on a liquid photopolymer which hardens when
exposed to UV light. A vertically-actuated platform is immersed in a vat
of photopolymer such that only a very thin layer of liquid covers the
surface. A UV laser is scanned over the surface in a speciﬁc pattern curing
the photopolymer in the desired shape. The platform is lowered until the
same thickness of liquid photopolymer is above the previous solid layer.
Hence, the UV laser builds the 3D part layer-by-layer. This technique
offers very high tolerances and good surface ﬁnish but it is limited to
photopolymers. Fused deposition modelling (FDM) involves extrusion of
a melted thermoplastic fed by a wire into a heating chamber. Extrusion is
by a nozzle through which liquid thermoplastic is deposited onto a

4.3. Universal processor
Direct magma electrolysis of regolith is highly energy-intensive as it
requires a molten state for the minerals (1300–1700  C) to generate
oxygen at the anode and yields mongrel alloys including Fe–Si at the
cathode and molten silicate ceramic. Although silicate ceramics may be
used for structures, mongrel alloys yield uncontrolled performance
depending on the speciﬁc composition of the original mineral. This is the
reason for employing chemical pre-processing to yield more predictable
and controllable materials. Our industrial ecology scheme exploits the
capabilities of the Metalysis FFC (Fray Farthing Chen) process that reduces any solid oxide (such as rutile, alumina, silica, etc) into near-pure
metal using a CaCl2 electrolyte to yield iron, titanium, aluminium, etc
from pre-processed lunar minerals (Ellery et al., 2017b). It is a general
electrolytic mineral reduction process which exhibits a solid-state mineral oxide cathode and a graphite anode at 900–1100  C. Maximum
10

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870

of launching payloads at high speeds beyond lunar escape velocity in
vacuo (Schroeder et al., 1989). In the railgun, the armature current is
delivered to the armature through a sliding contact with parallel rails. A
perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld from external coils provides the driving
force. In the coilgun, there is no contact as the ring current is maintained
by magnetic induction between mutually coupled coils on the barrel and
projectile respectively. The driving magnetic ﬁeld is generated by a series
of coils that are energized successively. The coilgun is a linear electric
motor comprising a series of stator coils which accelerates an armature.
The coil type design is superior in eliminating contact wear but requires
very high switching voltages. The railgun has limits on its performance
but this may be enhanced by introducing additional complexities such as
additional rails and use of a helical coil armature but the sliding contact
remains (Engel and Timpson, 2015). The coilgun is in general preferable.
Muzzle velocity is given by:

platform. The nozzle traces out a pattern which hardens. The platform is
depressed and another layer added by the nozzle. It is limited to thermoplastics though additives can be included. Laminated object
manufacturing (LOM) uses adhesive-backed sheets (of paper, plastic,
ceramic, composite, metals, etc) lain on top of each other using a heated
roller, each layer being cut by laser into the required pattern once it has
been laid. This technique requires prior forming of the layers and adhesive. Powdered metal may be sintered into a wide variety of structures
through additive manufacturing. Selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/
M) involves the use of a laser to thermally sinter or melt a powder bed of
metal, ceramic or polymer onto a platform. The laser beam scans the
pattern which fuses or melts the powder into a solid layer. The sintering
temperature (900–1300  C) can be considerably below the melting
temperature (1600  C) of a metal (in this case, iron/steel) favouring a low
cooling rate. The platform is depressed with another powder layer lain
over the top of the previous layer and the process repeated. The unfused
powder acts as temporary support. Laser energy absorption rate is
directly proportional to electrical resistivity so insulators tend to require
more energy for processing. LENS (laser engineered shaping) is variation
in which powder is fed directly into the laser beam and melts the particles
onto a platform. SLS/SLM has become the most popular technique but
electron beam additive manufacturing (EBAM) which replaces the laser
with an electron beam offers certain advantages including greater efﬁciency for lunar application (Taminger and Haﬂey, 2006). SLS/M does
introduce residual stresses in the 3D part due to shrinkage of each layer
on cooling which may be alleviated by heating the chamber to reduce
temperature gradients (Mercelis and Kruth, 2006). The chief problem
with all 3D printing is that it yields poor ﬁnish, often exhibiting a staircase effect requiring post-processing. Nevertheless, metals may be 3D
printed directly from metal feedstock into a variety of useful machines
such as propellant/oxidant tanks, mining structures, manufacturing and
assembly machines. The RepRap 3D printer is an FDM device that prints
in thermoplastic (Jones et al., 2011) (ABS and PLA being most common
though there exist universal extruder parts that can print in more diverse
materials with low melting points). Its unique capability is that it can
print many of its own plastic parts, representing the ﬁrst step towards
self-replication capability.
To complete the self-replication process, RepRap would need to be
able to 3D print its structural metal bars (which would be enabled
through metal printing capability), its electric motor drives, its electronics boards and its computer programs. In addition, it would need to
self-assemble (a capability afforded by mechatronic capabilities (Zykov
et al., 2005)) and include its own power system, and its raw
material-to-feedstock processing within its self-replication scheme. We
hypothesise that it sufﬁces to 3D print electric motors, vacuum tubes and
piezoelectric/selenium sensors to prove universal construction. A universal kit of parts had been proposed as a universal construction system
with a view to enable self-assembly with standard connections of robotic
machines and habitats from in-situ resources with self-replication capacity (Howe, 2006). We have been making some progress in 3D printing
DC electric motors (Ellery, 2018b) and demonstrating them as part of a
3D printed self-assembling system of actuated panels (Ellery and Elaskri,
2019) as a signiﬁcant step towards the realization of a universal
constructor. We have also indicated how these universal construction
properties may be exploited to construct entire lunar bases and their
interior conﬁguration (Ellery, 2019b).

v¼


1=3
2γcT εμ0 σl
2
2
r ρ

where γ ¼ electrical conductivity, c ¼ speciﬁc heat per unit volume, T ¼
temperature, ε ¼ geometric factor<0.5, μ ¼ magnetic permeability, σ ¼
B2

εμ0 ¼ maximum armature stress, B ¼ magnetic ﬂux density, r ¼ ratio of

projectile-to-armature mass, ρ ¼ armature mass density, l ¼ barrel length.
Hence, the launch velocity is critically dependent on coil electrical conductivity, armature stresses and magnetic ﬂux density which will be
determined by the 3D printing quality of coils, magnets and structural
robustness of the armature. A detailed exposition on electromagnetic
launchers in a different context is given in (Ellery and Howe, 2018).
Lunar escape velocity is achievable in a modest-sized electromagnetic
launcher depending on the acceleration permitted – higher acceleration
permits shorter length.
6. Conclusions
ISRU is an actively developing ﬁeld ranging from the supply of consumables to human missions through the full spectrum to colonisation of
the Moon through leveraging of an industrial infrastructure. Of particular
importance, 3D printing is a recent technological development that
promises to transform ISRU capabilities, culminating in the possibility of
self-replicating machines. Although we have not considered the overall
architecture of a self-replicating machine here, there have been several
proposals of such (Chirikjian et al., 2002). This capability would transform lunar exploration and development, opening a number of hitherto
implausible mission concepts. The potential for lunar exploitation is
potentially enormous including the provision of solar power satellites
manufactured from lunar resources and launched into high Earth orbit by
electromagnetic launcher to provide scalable clean energy to Earth
(Ellery, 2018c).
Declaration of competing interest
There is no conﬂict of interest.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Alex Ellery: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.

5.2. Electromagnetic launchers

Appendix A. Supplementary data

If a DC electric motor were rolled out into a linear motor, we have the
basis for an electromagnetic launcher. As we stated earlier, electromagnetic launchers can exploit abundant supplies of solar energy on the
Moon rather than consuming scarce resource of H2/O2. Furthermore, the
complexity of launch pad construction including logistics is arguably no
less than that involved in electromagnetic launcher construction. There
are two types of electromagnetic launcher – railgun and coilgun - capable

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pss.2020.104870.
References
Andrews, D., Colaprete, A., Quinn, J., Chavers, D., Picard, M., 2014. “Introducing the
Resource Prospector (RP) Mission” AIAA 2014-4378.
11

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870
match made on the Moon. In: Proc Int Astronautics Congress. Adelaide, Australia,
IAC-17-D4.5.4x39364.
Ellery, A., Burchell, M., Cloutis, E., 2018. Quo Vadis? the Moon May Offer Superior InSitu Resource Utilisation Prospects than Asteroids. Proc Re-Inventing Space Conf,
London, UK. BIS-RS-2018-9.
Ellery, A., Lowing, P., Mellor, I., Conti, M., Wanjara, P., Bernier, F., Kirby, M.,
Carpenter, K., Dillon, P., Dawes, W., Sibille, L., Mueller, R., 2018. Towards in-situ
manufacture of magnetic devices from rare earth materials mined from asteroids. In:
Proc Int Symp Artiﬁcial Intelligence Robotics & Automation In Space. Madrid, Spain,
paper no. 10c-1.
Ellery, A., Crawford, I., Burchell, M., Cloutis, E., 2018. Quo Vadis? The Moon may offer
superior in-situ resource utilisation prospects than asteroids. In: Proc 16th
Reinventing Space Conf (London, UK).
Engel, T., Timpson, E., 2015. General theory of DC electromagnetic launchers. J. Appl.
Phys. 118, 083902.
French, B., Heiken, G., Vaniman, D., 1991. “Lunar Sourcebook: a User’s Guide to the
Moon. Cambridge University Press.
Gao, Y., Ellery, A., Vincent, J., Eckersley, S., Jaddou, M., 2007. “Planetary micropenetrator concept study with biomimetic drill and sampler design“. IEEE Trans.
Aero. Electron. Syst. 43 (3), 875–885.
Hill, R., 2002. “Silicone surfactants – new developments”. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface
Sci. 7 (5–6), 255–261.
Horanyi, M., Walch, B., Robertson, S., Alexander, D., 1998. Electrostatic charging
properties of Apollo 17 lunar dust. J. Geophys. Res. B 103 (E4), 8575–8580.
Howe, A., 2006. Cassette factories and robotic bricks: a roadmap for establishing deep
space infrastructures. SAE Trans J Aerospace 330–363. SAE paper no. 2005-01-2911.
sustainabledevelopment. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents
/Agenda21.pdf.
presentations. https://www.hou.usra.edu/meetings/leag2017/presentations/wednesda
y/sampson.pdf.
Jones, R., Haufe, P., Sells, E., Iravani, P., Olliver, V., Palmer, C., Bowyer, A., 2011.
“RepRap – the Replicating Rapid Prototyper” Robotica, vol. 29, pp. 177–191. Jan.
Jordens, A., Cheng, Y., Waters, K., 2013. Review of the beneﬁciation of rare earth element
bearing minerals. Miner. Eng. 41, 97–114.
Joy, K., Crawford, I., Curran, N., Zolensky, M., Fagan, A., King, D., 2016. Moon: an
archive of small body migration in the solar system. Earth Moon Planets 118,
133–158.
Kaye, R., 2005. Operational requirements and issues for coilgun electromagnetic
launchers. IEEE Trans. Magn. 41 (1), 194–199.
Kruzelecky, R., Cloutis, E., Hoa, S., Therriault, D., Ellery, A., Xian Jiang, X., et al., 2011.
Project MoonDust: characterisation and mitigation of lunar dust. In: Proc 41st Int Conf
Environmental Systems. AIAA 2011-5184.
Landis, G., 2005. “Materials Reﬁning for Solar Array Production on the Moon” NASA TM2005-214014.
Landis, G., 2007. Materials reﬁning on the Moon. Acta Astronaut. 60, 906–915.
Landis, G., Jenkins, P., 2002. Dust mitigation for Mars solar arrays. Pro. IEEE. Conf.
Photovolt. Spec. 812–815.
Lauer, H., Allton, J., 1992. “Mars containers – dust on teﬂon sealing surfaces” space int
conf space III: engineering. Constr. Oper. Space. 1, 508–517.
Low, Z.-X., Chua, T., Ray, B., Mattia, D., Metcalfe, I., Patterson, A., 2017. Perspective on
3D printing of separation membranes and comparison to related unconventional
fabrication techniques. J. Membr. Sci. 523 (2), 596–613.
Lynas, D., Horberry, T., 2011. Human factor issues with automated mining equipment.
Ergon. Open J. 4 (Suppl. 2-M3), 74–80.
Lynch, B., Jiang, X.-X., Ellery, A., Nitzsche, F., 2016. Characterisation, modelling and
control of NiTi shape memory alloy based on electrical resistance feedback. J. Intell.
Mater. Syst. Struct. https://doi.org/10.1177/1045389X16633764.
Menning Chen, Humbert, 2010. Replacing bulk Pt in Pt-Ni-Pt bimetallic structures with
tungsten monocarbide (WC). J. Catal. 271, 132–139.
Mercelis, P., Kruth, J.-P., 2006. Residual stresses in selective laser sintering and selective
laser melting. Rapid Prototyp. J. 12 (5), 254–265.
Moses, M., Ma, H., Wolfe, K., Chirikjian, G., 2014. Architecture for universal construction
via modular robotic components. Robot. Autonom. Syst. 62 (7), 945–965.
Patel, C., 1992. Ind. Ecol. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89, 798–799.
Qadi, A., Cross, M., Ellery, A., Nicol, C., 2012. “Smart Reconﬁgurable All-Terrain MultiMission Planetary Micro-rover, Design and Control” Proc 16th CASI Conf ASTRO.
Quebec City, no 84.
Schroeder, J., Gully, J., Driga, M., 1989. Electromagnetic launchers for space applications.
IEEE Trans. Magn. 25 (1), 504–507.
Snyder, M., Dunn, J., Gonzalez, E., 2013. Effects of microgravity on extrusion based
additive manufacturing. In: AIAA Space 2013 Conference & Exposition.
Stoica, A., 2019. “Solar Power Infrastructure Around Shackleton Crater” Lunar ISRU
Workshop - Developing a New Space Economy. Columbia, MD, abstract no 5096.
Taminger, K., Haﬂey, R., 2006. “Electron Beam Freeform Fabrication (EBF3) for CostEffective Near-Net Shape Manufacturing” NASA TM 2006-214284.
Taylor, L., Schmitt, H., Carrier III, D., Nakagawa, M., 2005. “Lunar Dust Problem: from
Liability to Asset” AIAA 1st Space Exploration Conf. Continuing the Voyage of
Discovery, Orlando FL. AIAA 2005-2510.
Tucker, D., Ethridge, E., Toutanji, H., 2006. “Production of Glass Fibres for Reinforcing
Lunar Concrete” 44th. AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, NV,
pp. 6335–6343.
Veldhuyzen, H., 1995. “Aluminium Extraction from an Ontario Calcic Anorthosite by Acid
Processes and Resultant Products – Aluminium Chemicals, Coatings, Fillers,
Absorbent and Cement Additive” Ontario Geological Survey Open File Report 5919.
Warren, P., Wasson, J., 1979. Origin. KREP. Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 17 (1), 73–88.

Avchare, K., Tarwani, A., Jain, D., Saini, U., Purohit, R., 2014. Space manufacturing
techniques: a review. Int. J. Sci. Res. Pub. 4 (4), 2250–3153.
Ayres, R., 1998. Industrial metabolism: work in progress. In: van den Bergh, J., Hofkes, M.
(Eds.), “Theory and Implementation of Economic Models for Sustainable
Development” Economy & Environment 15. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 195–228.
Basu, A., 2005. Nanophase Fe0 in lunar soils. J. Earth. Sys. Sci. 114 (3), 375–380.
Bland, P., Artemieva, N., Collins, G., Bottke, W., Bussey, D., Joy, K., 2008. “Asteroids on
the Moon: Projectile Survival during Low Velocity Impacts” 39th Lunar & Planetary
Science Conf abstract no 2045.
Cabrera, A., Maple, M., Asunmaa, S., Arrhenius, G., 1976. “Formation of Water and
Methane Catalysed by Lunar Dust” NASA Report N91-71212.
Calle, C., McFall, J., Buhler, C., Snyder, S., Ritz, M., Trigwell, S., Chen, A., Hogue, M.,
2008. Development of an Active Dust Mitigation Technology for Lunar Exploration.
AIAA Space Conf & Exposition, San Diego. AIAA 2008-7894.
Castor, S., Hedrick, J., 2006. “Rare Earth Elements” Industrial Minerals, seventh ed.
Society for Mining, Metallurgy & Exploration, Littleton, Co, pp. 769–792.
Cesaretti, F., Dini, E., De Kestellier, X., Colla, V., Pambaguian, L., 2014. Building
components for an outpost on the lunar soil by means of a novel 3D printing
technology. Acta Astronaut. 93, 430–450.
Chen, X., Mao, S., 2007. Titanium dioxide nanomaterials: synthesis, properties,
modiﬁcations and applications. Chem. Rev. 107, 2891–2959.
Chirikjian, G., Zhou, Y., Suthakorn, J., 2002. Self-replicating robots for lunar
development. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 7 (4), 462–472.
Clark, P., Curtis, S., Minetto, F., Keller, J., 2007. Finding a dust mitigation strategy that
works on the lunar surface. In: 38th Lunar & Planetary Science Conf, vol.1338, p. 1175.
League City, Texas.
Cong, M., Shi, H., 2008. Study of magnetic ﬂuid rotary seals for wafer handling robots.
IEEE. Int. Conf. Mechatron. Mach. Vis. Pract. 269–273.
Connelly, L., Koshland, C., 1997. “Two aspects of consumption: using an exergy-based
measure of degradation to advance the theory and implementation of industrial
ecology” Resources. Conserv. Recycl. 19, 199–217.
Crawford, I., 2001. Scientiﬁc case for a human spaceﬂight infrastructure. Earth Moon
Planets 87, 221–231.
Crawford, I., 2015. “Lunar resources: Prog. Phys. Geogr. 39 (2), 137–167.
Crawford, I., 2017. Why we should build a Moon village. Astron. Geophys. 58 (Dec),
6–18, 6.21.
Debus, A., 2001. “Planetary Protection Aspects for In-Situ and Sample Return
Exobiological Experimentations” Proc 1st European Workshop On Exo- and Astr-Biology
(ESA SP-406), pp. 113–119. Frascati, Italy.
Delano, J., 1986. Pristine lunar glasses: criteria, data and implications. J. Geophys. Res. B
91 (B4), D201–D213.
Eimer, B., Taylor, L., 2007. Dust mitigation: lunar air ﬁltration with a permanent magnet
system. In: 38th Lunar & Planetary Science Conf, vol.1338, p. 1654. League City, Texas.
Ellery, A., 2005. Robot-environment interaction - the basis for mobility in planetary
micro-rovers. Robot. Autonom. Syst. 51, 29–39.
Ellery, A., 2015. “Ultimate smart system – steps towards a self-replicating machine”. Proc
5th Int Conf Smart Mater. Struct. 225–234.
Ellery, A., 2016. Are self-replicating machines feasible? AIAA J Spacecraft & Rockets 53
(2), 317–327.
Ellery, A., 2016. Planetary Rovers. Springer-Praxis Publishers, Chichester, UK.
Ellery, A., 2016. Are self-replicating machines feasible? AIAA J Spacecraft & Rockets 53
(2), 317–327.
Ellery, A., 2016. John von Neumann’s self-replicating machine – critical components
required. Proc IEEE Int Conf Systems Man & Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary,
pp. 314–319.
Ellery, A., 2017. “Space exploration through self-replication technology compensates for
discounting in NPV cost-beneﬁt analysis – a business case? New Space J 5 (3),
141–154.
Ellery, A., 2017. “Space exploration through self-replication technology compensates for
discounting in NPV cost-beneﬁt analysis – a business case? New Space J 5 (3),
141–154.
Ellery, A., 2018. Sustainability through leveraging of extraterrestrial resources. In: Proc
IEEE Conf Technologies For Sustainability, p. 8671386. Long Beach, CA.
Ellery, A., 2018. “The machine to end all machines – towards self-replicating machines on
the Moon’. In: Proc IEEE Aerospace Conf. Big Sky, MT, paper no. 2032_2.0602.
Ellery, A., 2018. Geophysiological treatment of an ailing Earth from space: self-replication
technology is essential. J. Clim. Change: Impacts Responses 10 (3), 25–40.
Ellery, A., 2019. In-situ Solar Power Generation and Storage for a Sustainable Moon
Village. Int Astronautics Congress, Washington DC. IAC-19-C3.4.4c49639.
Ellery, A., 2019. “The way of indigenous peoples – 3D printing sustainable lunar bases
from in-situ resources”. Int. Astronaut. Congr. Washington DC, IAC-19A1,7,2,x49637.
Ellery, A., Elaskri, A., 2019. Steps towards Self-Assembly of Lunar Structures from
Modules of 3D Printed In-Situ Resources. Int Astronautics Congress, Washington DC.
IAC-19-D4.1.4.x49787.
Ellery, A., Howe, S., 2018. Robust asteroid impact mitigation by viral infection-induced
exocytosis. In: Proc 16th Reinventing Space Conf, London, UK.
Ellery, A., Muscatello, A., 2017. Provisioning the naked astronaut with bounty on Mars
using robotic self-replicators. In: Proc Int Astronautics Congress. Adelaide, Australia,
IAC-17-B3.7.10x39326.
Ellery, A., Lowing, P., Wanjara, P., Kirby, M., Mellor, I., Doughty, G., 2017. FFC
Cambridge process and metallic 3D printing for deep in-situ resource utilisation – a
match made on the Moon. In: Proc Int Astronautics Congress. Adelaide, Australia,
IAC-17-D4.5.4x39364.
Ellery, A., Lowing, P., Wanjara, P., Kirby, M., Mellor, I., Doughty, G., 2017. FFC
Cambridge process and metallic 3D printing for deep in-situ resource utilisation – a

12

A. Ellery

Planetary and Space Science 184 (2020) 104870
Yue, Z., Johnson, B., Monton, D., Melosh, H., Di, K., Hu, W., Liu, Y., 2013. Projectile
remains in central peaks of lunar impact craters. Nat. Geosci. 6, 435–437.
Zykov, V., Mytilinaios, E., Adams, B., Lipson, H., 2005. Self-reproducing machines. Nature
435, 163–164.

Wieczorek, M., Weiss, B., Steart, S., 2012. Impactor origin for lunar magnetic anomalies.
Science 335, 1212–1215.
Wilkinson, A., DeGennaro, A., 2007. Digging and pushing lunar regolith: classical soil
mechanics and the forces needed for excavation and traction. J. Terramechanics 44,
133–152.

13

