50th International Conference on Environmental Systems
12-15 July 2021

ICES-2021-180

Thermal design challenges for lunar ISRU payloads
Philipp B. Hager1, David Binns2
European Space Agency, European Research and Technology Centre, Noordwijk, 2200 AG, The Netherlands

Several Concurrent Design Facility (CDF) studies were performed at ESA ESTEC to
investigate different lunar in-situ resource utilization (ISRU) payload concepts. There are
numerous technological challenges mainly associated with the maturity of the different
processes and associated components, but also regarding thermal design aspects. A wide range
of dissipated powers, high process temperatures, batch processes, and the thermal lunar
surface environment have proven to be major design drivers for the ISRU payloads.

Carbothermal reduction with methane, ilmenite reduction with hydrogen, and molten salt
electrolysis were investigated. The ISRU processes are characterized by process temperatures
from 850°C to 1300°C and downstream process units of up to 500°C. The investigated concepts
required from 150 W to 900 W of heating power over several hours per batch, for multiple
batches over the course of a lunar day. A further challenge is the thermal process control for
thermally inert ovens with regolith. The limitations of payloads, regarding dimensions, mass,
accommodation and allowable heat fluxes at the interfaces to the lander, restrict the thermal
control possibilities further. All this is placed in a challenging lunar surface thermal
environment.

In this paper the thermal designs for two ISRU payloads are described along with the
respective results. Eventually potential thermal control technologies are sketched to overcome
the shortcomings of the current design limitations for lunar ISRU payloads.

Nomenclature
CDF
FFC
ISRU
MLI
MMO
SINPA

=
=
=
=
=
=

Concurrent Design Facility
Fray, Farthing & Chen
In-situ resource utilization
Multi-Layer-Insulation
Moon Mission of Opportunity
Sintering Payload

I. Introduction

I

N 2017 and 2018 several studies were conducted on lunar in-situ resource utilization (ISRU) at the European Space
Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC) Concurrent Design Facility (CDF). The CDF is mainly used for Phase
0 level studies. It is based on model based system engineering approaches 1. In general, the objective of these CDF
studies is to derive a preliminary design but more importantly to identify design drivers, need for technology
developments and derive requirements for subsequent project phases. An objective of these early phase ESA ISRU
assessment studies was to build a knowledge base to inform future decision making, which was of particular
importance for a novel field.

1

Thermal Engineer, Thermal Control Section (ESA-TEC-MTT), Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands, philipp.hager@esa.int.
2
Systems Engineer, Systems and Concurrent Engineering Section (ESA-TEC-SYE), Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG,
Noordwijk, The Netherlands, david.binns@esa.int
Copyright © 2021 European Space Agency

The ISRU related studies were ISRU-MMO (Moon Mission of Opportunity) and ISRU-FFC (Fray, Farthing &
Chen), ISRU-Pilot Plant and SINPA (Sintering Payload). The present document focuses on the thermal design of the
ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC studies. Both were conceived as payloads for commercial landers. As such, the lander
designs are not addressed in this paper. Yet, the challenges are addressed, arising from the unknown and uncertainties
related to the thermal interface to the commercial landers.
The processes for the extraction of oxygen or water from lunar regolith were considered to minimize the
temperatures required. This paper does not go into the detail of the physics, general principles, system level
implications and holistic advantages/disadvantages of these reductions processes for reasons of brevity. Only the flow
down of system level requirement intrinsic to them relevant to thermal design are described. A useful review of ISRU
processes can be found in Ref. 2.
Thermal aspects were significant design drivers for all of these ISRU studies. ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC focused
on the exploitation of regolith to gain resources from lunar soil. In the ISRU-MMO study carbothermal reduction of
silicates3,4 and ilmenite reduction of hydrogen5 were investigated. The ISRU-FFC study focused on molten salt
electrolysis, based on the FFC metalysis process6,7.
In the following, first the boundary conditions of thermal design for lunar surface payloads are summarized, then
ISRU payload relevant trade-offs are shown and finally first order thermal models and analysis of the two ISRU
studies are presented. The conclusions from both studies are synthesized and common problems are highlighted.
Finally some potential technology solutions are sketched for the thermal design and control of ISRU payloads 3.

II. Boundary Conditions for Lunar Surface ISRU Payloads
In this section the main boundary conditions are presented which impact the thermal design of lunar surface
payloads in general, and ISRU payloads in particular. They will be discussed following the operational timeline.
No specific aspects were identified for the launch or low Earth orbit, from the thermal engineering perspective.
During transfer, the orientation of the lander and of the payload towards the Sun and deep space is a thermal design
driver. If the lander is not spinning, the transit can be the worst cold case. Furthermore, sun trapping during transit
might become problematic for payloads with highly reflective outer surface coatings, sized to cope with high lunar
surface temperatures. The lunar orbit can pose additional thermal constraints on the payload, especially if the periselen is low and on the dayside of the Moon. This can cause high IR loads from the lunar surface. During the landing
phase, the heat from the thrusters can impact the payload and has to be taken into account. For the breaking manoeuvers
and final landing a dedicated time line is necessary, accompanied by the to-be-expected heat fluxes from the lander
and the environment, as well as the temperature at the interface to the lander.
In lunar surface missions a number of uncertainties impact the thermal design of payloads. These uncertainties
originate from the landing site selection, the orientation of the lander on the surface, the location of the payload on the
lander, and the local surface topography. The landing site impacts the local temperature extremes on the lunar surface,
i.e. temperature amplitude depends on latitude and local slopes. The orientation of the lander on the lunar surface with
regard to local North or South, determines the payloads exposure to the Sun and the albedo and IR received from
ground. Commercial lander providers with no flight heritage at the time of the studies, either specified a wide range
of possible orientations due to guidance navigation and control system limitations, or they did not guarantee any
orientation at all. The location of the payload on the lander depends on the lander and might change in the course of a
project. Depending on the shape of the lander this might mean exposure to radiators or heat exchange with other
payloads. And of course it impacts the heat exchange with deep space, the lunar surface or the Sun. A last uncertainty
is the local small scale topography. Local topography is governed by crater slopes and rims or nearby boulders. These
local surface features can vary in temperature significantly from the average surrounding lunar surface, which might
lead to additional heat fluxes or lower sink temperatures.
A further difficulty with regard to lunar regolith properties is the danger of degradation of optical surface
properties8. This means oversizing of radiators and insulations, to account for degradation by lunar dust over the course
of the mission duration.
On top of the challenges mentioned above there is also the lunar night-time survival aspect. Surviving a lunar night
essentially means to survive an ‘eclipse’ of 14 days. This period can even be longer at the lunar poles. The lunar
surface temperature decreases over the course of the lunar night from 150 K to 100 K around the equator or from 100
K to 60 K at high lunar latitudes, excluding even colder temperatures in permanently shadowed craters. In this
3

The technology needs identified and presented in this paper are the view of the author only. They are no officially
fostered by ESA or part of an official roadmap.
2
International Conference on Environmental Systems

temperature range the heat received from the lunar surface becomes very small. Lunar night time survival requires a
number of thermal control mechanisms which make the thermal control system complex. In combination with the
associated heater power demand and the subsequent size of the power subsystem, lunar night survival is often
discarded. The current first generation of commercial lunar surface landers often does not foresee to survive a lunar
night at all.

III. Thermal Design related Trade-offs
The main trade-offs which were performed in the scope of the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC studies regarding the
thermal design, focuses on four aspects: heat application, heat distribution, thermal insulation and heat rejection.
A. Heat Application
Several ways of applying heat to a Regolith sample can be envisioned and can be found in literature. Table 1
summarizes the basic concepts for heat application in ISRU systems and their major benefits and shortcomings, purely
from thermal engineering point of view. Table 1 focuses on the main mechanism and does not claim to be exhaustive.
In the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC studies, electric heating was selected as baseline as it provides less design
restrictions than other options, is a high TRL technology, a proven concept, and allows the implementation of
relatively simple and well established heater control.
Heat Distribution
There are many ways conceivable to
distribute heat in a porous media such as a
regolith sample in an ISRU reactor. Table 2
summarizes different heat distribution
methods considered in the scope of the ISRUMMO study. Table 2 is qualitative and does
not claim to be exhaustive. There are many
different technical solutions or combinations
of the presented methods thinkable to achieve
heat distribution in a regolith sample.
The low thermal conductivity of regolith
inhibits an effective heat transfer inside a solid
and static regolith sample. Mixing of regolith
allows an increased heat transfer. Mixing can
be achieved for example via stirring
mechanisms (augers), rotation or vibration of
the entire reactor. A further increase of heat
transfer can be created by using convective
heat transfer by a gas, or theoretically a fluid.
The gas can either be injected actively with
high pressure to create movement of the
regolith or the (reactant) gases can be injected
at low pressure and their presence will allow
for the convective heat transfer. The later
concept is also referred to as residual flow.
In the scope of the ISRU-MMO study a
concept was selected which combines a
moving / stirred regolith sample and a
conductive and radiative heat input from the
reactor walls with the convective heat
exchange by the pre-heated reactant gas.
For ISRU-FFC heat distribution not re-visited due to the given principle of the FFC-metalysis process. In the scope
of the ISRU-FFC study the CaCl2 salt bath was pre-selected. In a salt bath the regolith sample does not require active
heating. It is heated by the salt bath.
Table 1. Heat application methods with benefits and
drawbacks.
Heat
application
Benefits & Drawbacks
method
+ Direct, no energy conversion losses;
availability; no reaction products
Solar- Implementation in overall design; requires
thermal
optical path; concentrated energy; difficult
heating3
to adjust intensity; requires large collector
areas for up-scaling;
+ High thermal efficiency; landing site
‘Radioindependent
isotope
- Difficult in implementation; safety
heating’ –
aspects; requires cooling during assembly,
radio
integration and test (AIT); - not adjustable;
isotope
no switching capabilities; contamination
decay9
and waste
+ Widely used; simple implementation;
design flexibility regarding dimensions,
Electric
shapes, power densities; controllable heat
heating
output
- Inefficient, i.e. conversion losses from
energy source.
+ Direct and efficient heat application inside
the sample
Microwave
- Design limitations; requires beneficiation of
heating10
samples; possible local hot spots in sample due
to different reaction to microwaves; low TRL
for regolith heating.

3
International Conference on Environmental Systems

B.

C. Thermal Insulation
An efficient thermal insulation is paramount to achieving the required temperature ranges in the regolith inside
Table 2. Heat distribution methods with benefits and drawbacks.
Heat
distribut
Sketch
Benefits & Drawbacks
ion
Single bed
+ Simple design; easy to implement
or
- Large gradients due to low conductivity of Regolith; Local hot spots at
multiple/sp
the conductive interface between heater and sample -> danger of sintering
lit beds11
of Regolith; uses only conductive heat transfer; gas penetration is
questionable; thermal control difficult because of delayed feedback
between temperature measurement and heat input; filling and draining of
reactor difficult
Falling
+ continuous or batched process possible; homogeneous heating possible
curtain12
- short exposure time; can be increased by a counter movement (e.g.
gaseous counter flow, Archimedes spiral), or the fall velocity can be
reduced (e.g. chevrons); requires direct view from a radiation source to the
g
sample; difficult gas extraction / sealing
Fluidized
+ high heat transfer by constant mixing of Regolith (behavior similar to a
beds13
fluid); pre-heated gas increases heat transfer; homogenous
- requires gas injection porous for gas but blocking regolith; high pressure
constant gas feed necessary; levitated finest particles and distributes them
downstream
Vibro+ high heat transfer by constant mixing of Regolith (behavior similar to a
fluidizatio
fluid)
n14
- requires mechanical agitation; challenging decoupling of vibration
mechanism from seals, regolith filling & removing and gas connections
Residual
flow13
g

Salt bath15
+

-

+ conductive, radiative and convective heat transport combined;
- requires a mechanism for constant rotation, challenging gas feed and
drain connections for process gas; challenging filling & removing of
Regolith sample
+ sample enclosed by a medium; salt can be transported and handled as solid;
becomes fluid at higher temperatures leading to convective heat transport;
- batch process; salt losses; challenging sample filling and draining;

ISRU reactors. The thermal insulation necessary for ISRU reactors is more akin to terrestrial high vacuum ovens than
to typical aerospace applications. This is mainly because of the required process temperatures of 850°C to 1300°C for
the potential processes discussed in this paper4. Yet, the terrestrial applications usually do not have the strict
requirements in terms of allowable mass, available power, presence of ultra-high vacuum also outside the oven, and
the complex and challenging lunar surface thermal environment.
Table 3 summarizes thermal insulation possibilities which were considered for the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC
studies. The main aspects in the selection of a suitable thermal insulation for ISRU payloads are the insulation
properties, but also the area specific mass, the suitability for the space environment, temperature extremes, launch and
landing loads, the machine-ability, and its handling.
In the scope of the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC study a combination of several insulation mechanisms was
selected. The baseline insulation design uses a metallic radiative shield next to the outer surface of the oven, followed
by a solid alumina (Al2O3) insulation. The outermost insulation layer is a high temperature MLI.

4

It should be noted at this point that other processes, not considered in the ESA studies presented here, could require
temperatures up to 2000°C
4
International Conference on Environmental Systems

D. Heat Removal and Rejection
Classical thermal design relies on the sizing of a radiator for a hot case and subsequent sizing of heating power for
the cold case. For spacecraft operating on the lunar surface this common approach has only limited applicability. This
is especially true for ISRU payloads. Factors impacting radiator sizing are its orientation towards the lunar surface
and the Sun angle of incidence, the high temperature of the ISRU reactor, its heat losses and its mode of operation.
Table 3. Insulation methods with benefits and drawbacks.
Insulation
Examples
Benefits & Drawbacks
Method
Ceramics: e.g.
+ solid; known material properties; reliable and well proven in earth
- Al2O3 Silica
applications; machinability
Solid
- Chamotte
- ceramics: mass; potentially sensitive to shock; particular
Insulation
- Graphite based
contamination
Felts and plates
- graphite: mass; particular contamination
+ very good insulation properties; similar to Regolith, i.e. ISRU
- Fumed silica
insulation demonstration
Porous
flexible panels
- possible contamination issues; gravitation specific deformation
Insulation
possible
Open &
+ Light weight (low density)
Polyimid foams
closed cell
- restricted temperature range; less efficient insulation
foams
+ Very light weight; Superior insulation properties
Aerogel (Silica)
Aerogel
- brittle / sensitive to shocks
Metal for high
Radiation
+ light weight; very good insulation properties
temperature,
Shield
- surfaces are sensitive to contamination with lunar dust -> reduces
surface
finish
(Dewar
performance; support structure is necessary which introduces heat bridges
with low epsilon
flask)
+ very good insulation properties for large blankets; vast heritage in
spaceflight applications;
Titanium
foil
- reduced performance for small dimensions or complex blanket shapes;
Multi-Layer
with glass fiber
sensitive to contamination (covering with dust or abrasion of surface
Insulation
spacer
coating); limited temperature range (high temperature MLI up to
~500°C
This section rather discusses theoretically the applicability of heat rejection methods to ISRU payloads as a
combination of current and to-be-developed technologies. The mode of operation of common heat rejection methods
for spaceflight can be found in standard text books16 and will not be repeated here.
The main driving factors for heat rejection for ISRU payloads are external heat loads and the length of the lunar
day, the high internal dissipation, different operation modes and durations, high reaction chamber temperature, the
challenges stemming from heat input during different mission phases, and the interface to the lander. In order to cope
with these driving factors and allow for the operation of the ISRU payloads, there are three main approaches. These
are a) a variable heat rejection of the radiator or b) a switch-able heat transport between heat source and radiator, and
c) a reduction of the radiator temperature in cold case.

IV. Thermal Design and Analysis of Lunar ISRU Payloads
An important aspect of the CDF studies is to identify the driving design parameters and to perform trade-offs
which then are used on system level to conclude on the overall design. The presented concepts do not claim to be the
best solution. There are common aspects, which were a consequence of system level decisions and not only motivated
by thermal design aspects. It goes beyond the scope of this paper to also address and justify these individually.
For none of the presented CDF studies dedicated geometrical mathematical models (GMM) were created. The
thermal analyses are based on thermal mathematical models (TMM) with a low number of thermal nodes, supported
by spread-sheet based calculations. The nature of the CDF leads to a continuously changing design and hence there is
not enough time to prepare, debug and run elaborate thermal models.
The investigation of the thermal control in the scope of the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC study was focused on the
heat application, heat distribution, thermal insulation and to a lesser extent the heat rejection of the ISRU reactors.
5
International Conference on Environmental Systems

1
2
7
3

Classic thermal design aspects are not reported in this
paper, such as temperature range, stability and gradient
requirement
compliance
for
the
individual
components.

A. ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC Study Thermal
Designs
The main thermal requirements for the ISRU-MMO
4
reactor were to heat up a sample of 0.9 kg Regolith to
temperatures of 850 °C for the ilmenite concept 5 and a
5
sample of 0.5 kg Regolith to temperatures of 1300 °C
for the carbo-thermal concept. The reactor was
a)
Spacecraft structure
assumed to work in a batched mode. One batch was
5
1 Radiation gap (vacuum)
Heating element
required to last less than 20 hours as an initial
6 Structural support
2 Metallic shield
assumption. The total mass of the alumina insulation is
7 High temperature MLI
approx. 1.75 kg. No power restrictions were defined for
3 Solid Insulation
the ISRU-MMO study.
8 Gas filled (pre heated)
4 Sample
The main requirements relevant for the thermal
design
of the ISRU-FFC process are to heat up 4 kg of
1
CaCl2 to the operating temperature of 950 °C. In
2
principle different amount of regolith can be added but
in the ISRU-FFC study 250 g of regolith was used for
3
7
the computations. The reactor was assumed to work in
a batched mode. One batch was required to require a
heat-up of less than 6 hours and the subsequent process
was required to last less than 6 hours, too. It was
4
6
required that the ISRU-FFC reactor requires less than
500 W during heat-up and to maintain the process
5
during operation. Temperature stability in the reactor
was assumed to be ± 5 °C/min and the temperature
gradient less than 30 °C/m. The total mass of the
alumina insulation was approx. 7.6 kg.
b)
Spacecraft structure
Figure 1a shows a schematic of the ISRU-MMO
Figure 1. Schematic representation of thermal
reactor and Figure 1b shows a schematic of the ISRUbaseline designs; a) ISRU-MMO study and b) ISRUFFC reactor from a thermal engineering perspective.
FFC study. Not to scale.
The main components relevant for the thermal engineer
are a heater element (6) attached to the reactor chamber
(4), a vacuum gap (1) between the reactor and the solid ceramic insulation (3), a metallic radiation shield (2) as a first
insulating barrier, and a high temperature MLI (7). The MLI would be composed of metallic layers for the inner layers
and high performance polymers for the outer layers. There are conductive heat losses, caused by mechanisms in case
of ISRU-MMO or the crucible and cathode which have to be submerged in the CaCl2 bath in case of ISRU-FFC. Both
concepts have heat losses through connected pipe-work, the insulation and structural supports (8). In the ISRU-MMO
study a thermal decoupling between lander and payload was assumed. Commercial landers usually do require
negligible amounts of heat to be transferred to the lander. In the ISRU-FFC study a total conductive interface of 0.4
W/K to the lander was assumed. Feedthroughs or holes in the solid insulation were not accounted for which leads to
optimistic results. Also in both concepts there are radiative heat losses from the outermost MLI layer to the lunar
surface and deep space.
The lander interface was assumed to be a fixed boundary condition, under the assumption that the lander would
provide the thermal control of the interface. No temperature dependent material properties were considered. In case
of ISRU-FFC a simplified convective heat transfer was assumed between crucible and salt. Temperature dependent
thermal conductivity of CaCl2 was used together with latent heat during phase transition from solid to liquid.
8

5

6

Note that the feasibility for a ilmenite reduction process at a temperature of 850°C is controversial. At the time of
the study this process temperature was used as baseline for the thermal design and thus is used in this paper.
6
International Conference on Environmental Systems

The thermal design concept of the ISRU-MMO system is derived from the trade-offs on thermal insulation, heat
application and distribution briefly described in section III. In the case of ISRU-FFC, the insulation strategy was
derived in a similar way as for the ISRU-MMO concept but it started off with lower available heater power and the
requirement of shorter batch times. In both studies additional units were included, such as electronic control units or
mechanisms. These units were grouped according to their temperature ranges to foresee compartments of high
(additional process chambers), medium (electronic control units, mechanisms), or low (condensation plates, analysis
unit cold fingers) temperatures. These compartments are not further detailed in this paper as they were not studied in
significant detail in the course of the ISRU CDF studies.

V. ISRU Study Thermal Analysis Results

1000

The initial condition of all components was set
to -100°C in the ISRU-MMO study. The regolith
sample temperature is controlled by a simple
600
thermostatic control, i.e. full heater power is applied
whenever the regolith sample temperature is below
400
the target temperature. This assumption is justified
by the fact that the approach uses as rotation to stir
200
the regolith (moving bed) and that a process gas is
300 W
used. The stirring of the regolith and the process gas
600 W
0
will allow for a equilibration of the temperature
900 W
inside the process chamber. The ISRU-MMO
-200
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
results are optimistic because conductive heat
Time, h
losses to the lander are neglected. There are no
conductive links between the reactor, the radiation
Figure 2. ISRU-MMO heat-up time for process
shield and the solid insulation, as well as between
temperature of 850°C and input powers of 300 W, 600 W
the entire ISRU-MMO payload to the lander
and 900 W
structure. Only calculated temperatures are shown,
i.e. they do not contain any modeling uncertainty.
Table 4: Time to stabilization and average heater power
Furthermore the heater power does not contain any
after stabilization for three target temperatures and three
margin.
installed heater powers.
The graphs in Figure 2 and Table 4 show the
Target
300
600
900
results from simulation runs with the ISRU-MMO
Temp.
Unit
W
W
W
thermal model. Figure 2 shows the heat-up time for
[h]
20.1
8.1
4.9
Time to stabilization
cases with 300 W, 600 W, and 900 W of heater
850 °C
Average power after
power for a target temperature of 850°C. Table 4
[W]
274.1 318.8 327.0
stabilization
summarizes the required time until stabilization and
[h]
inf
9.0
5.4
Time to stabilization
average power after stabilization for three different
1000 °C
Average power after
[W]
n.a. 390.2 405.3
target temperatures 850°C, 1000°C, and 1300°C
stabilization
[h]
inf
12.2
6.6
Time to stabilization
and three heater power levels. The average heater
1300 °C
Average power after
power after stabilization is the power that has to be
[W]
n.a. 533.8 576.9
stabilization
provided continuously after the target temperature
is reached. Figure 2 indicates that for the analyzed
configuration, increasing the heater power by a factor of two, will reduce the time to stabilization by 60%, i.e. from
20.1 hours to 8.1 hours. A further increase to 900 W leads to another decrease by 24% to 4.9 hours. The average power
after stabilization increases from 274.1 W for 300 W to 327 W for 900 W. Table 4 also shows the same results for
target temperature of 1000°C, and 1300°C. These target temperatures cannot be reached for heater powers of 300 W.
The heat losses through the insulation are too high. In the analyzed configuration, the requirement of a heating time
of less than 20 hours can be achieved with 600 W and 900 W.
Figure 3 shows results from the simulation runs with the ISRU-FFC thermal model, in particular the heat-up time
for the ISRU-FFC process for different combinations of applied heater powers and CaCl2 masses. The initial condition
was set to 0 °C and the target temperature was 950 °C. Different from the ISRU-MMO case in the ISRU-FFC case
conductive heat losses were accounted for. The assumed conductive link between the reactor and the structure was
0.1 W/K and between the alumina insulation and the structure was 0.3 W/K. For the ISRU-FFC study also different
height/diameter ratios were investigated for the reactor, to reduce insulation material mass.
Sample temperature, C

800

7
International Conference on Environmental Systems

1000
900
800

Temperature, C

700
600
500
400
500 W / 4 kg
300

500 W / 1.5 kg

200

500 W / 0.5 kg
500 W / 4 kg var.

100

150 W / 1.5 kg

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time, h

Figure 3. ISRU-FFC heat-up time for different
combinations of heater power and CaCl2 masses.
Table 5. Time to stabilization and average heater power
after stabilization for different CaCl2 masses.
Installed heater
power

[W]

CaCl2 mass

[kg]

0.5

1.5

Regolith mass

[kg]

0.01

Time to
stabilization

[h]

0.5

500

500*

150

4.0

4.0

1.5

0.031

0.083

0.083

0.031

1.3

3.6

4.6

9.4

The different cases were 500 W heating power
with 0.5 kg, 1.5 kg and 4 kg of CaCl2 respectively
and one case with 150 W heating power and 1.5 kg
of CaCl2. The respective regolith sample masses are
0.01 kg of regolith for 0.5 kg of CaCl2, 0.031 kg of
regolith for 1.5 kg of CaCl2, and 0.083 kg for 4 kg
of CaCl2. One additional case (dotted line) is
showing the impact of the phase transition of the
CaCl2 from solid to liquid. The required heat-up
time of 6 hours was achieved for all simulation runs
with 500 W heater power but not for the case with
150 W heater power. For the same amount of CaCl2
and regolith in the reaction chamber, the heat-up
time decreases from 9.4 hours with 150 W to 14%,
i.e. 1.3 hours with 500 W heating power. The
average power after stabilization remains approx.
the same. The deviation shown in the table is due to
the used time step in the model and subsequent
computation errors. Introducing temperature
dependent material properties of the CaCl2 as well
as taking into account the latent heat for the phase
transition from solid to liquid starting at 772°C,
yields in an increase of time to stabilization of 30%.
Also here the average power after stabilization is
similar and the difference in the shown values is due
to the step width of the model.

VI.

Discussion

The two concepts should not be compared
Average power
[W]
54.8
77.2
125.6
136.4
80.0
after stabilization
directly as the initial and boundary conditions of
both studies and hence the technical solutions were
* variable CaCl2 material properties
different. The ISRU-MMO concept has a higher
mass of regolith with a poor thermal conductivity, less insulation but higher available heater powers. In case of the
ISRU-FFC mass of regolith is only a fraction of the amount in ISRU-MMO and the heater power was restricted to a
maximum of 500 W.
In both cases a thermostatic thermal control is assumed, i.e. the current temperature of the sample is measured and
the heating power can be applied at the reactor body without delay. In reality there will be a delay between temperature
measurement and heat application. The location of the temperature sensor is not trivial especially for a rotating reactor
as in case of ISRU-MMO. Furthermore, it is assumed that the temperature is homogenous inside the reactor. This
assumption is justified as in case of the ISRU-MMO a carrier gas is used once the reactor is closed. In the ISRU-FFC
process the CaCl2 is first in its solid and later in its liquid state. In a real ISRU application the thermal control will
most likely be PID controlled. It will be one of the major challenges of the characterization of such ISRU payloads to
identify and fine-tune the appropriate control parameters.
The presented results from the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC thermal models are based on a very preliminary design
on system and thermal subsystem level. The main design drivers for the thermal control system with regard to ISRU
payloads are the ISRU process, available heater power, the ISRU component temperature ranges, the lifetime of the
ISRU payload, the accommodation on the lander, and the landing site characteristics. Design drivers with a lower
impact are the transfer and landing phases of the mission.
1) The ISRU process: The ISRU process defines the required temperatures in the reaction chamber and in any
downstream process step. The target temperature of the sample in the ISRU reaction chamber together with
limitations on available power governs the need for thermal insulation. Different methods for heating and heat
distribution also impact the thermal design (see also section III).
2) Available heating power: Due to the dimensions and capabilities of the potential commercial lunar landers,
only low levels of heating power might be available for the ISRU process. This requires efficient thermal
8
International Conference on Environmental Systems

3)

4)

5)

6)

7)

8)
9)

insulations. The drawback of efficient thermal insulations is that it also takes long to cool down the ISRU
process chamber in between batches, in case of batch processes. This leads to operational constraints.
Temperature range of components: The absolute temperature of the process has implications on the usable
components inside (if any) and attached to the process chamber. Internal to an ISRU processes chamber, there
could be stirrers, augers, or crucibles. Attached to the entry and exit are for example valves, sealing,
membranes or bearings. Their respective maximum operational and storage temperature ranges lead to
restrictions. A pertinent point if the assessment of processes is extended to those beyond the regolith melting
points such as molten oxide electolysis and vapour phase pyrolysis.
Adjacent process steps: The process gases exiting the process chamber of the ISRU payload have a
temperature of several hundred degrees and some of the sub-sequent steps require also process temperatures
higher than 500°C. This impacts the designs of the attached piping and its insulation. In some cases pre-heating
of gases might be necessary and heat exchanges might be used to increase thermal efficiency.
Interface to the lander: The commercial landers usually require that no or only very limited heat is exchanged
at the interface between lander and payload. This is explicitly challenging for ISRU payloads which per
definition are operated at high temperatures. In addition, the lander restricts the view factor between the
payload and the environment and between payload and deep space as heat sink. Unfavorable accommodation
for ISRU payloads are those with increased view factor to the surface of the Moon or the lander, with
subsequent restrictions in rejecting heat.
Lunar thermal environment: Depending on latitude and time of lunar day the surface of the Moon can vary in
temperature between 30 K to almost 400 K. The temperature depends mostly on the angle of incidence from
the Sun and the duration of this exposure. Simplified approaches to compute the lunar daytime temperature
are presented for example in Ref. 17-20. Locally high lunar surface temperatures severely impacts the heat
rejection capability and as such the thermal design of any lunar spacecraft in general and ISRU payloads in
particular. On the other hand the absence of Sun, i.e. lunar night time or local shadow effects cools down the
environment to 100K and less, leading to an increase in heater power demand.
ISRU process thermal model and regolith material properties: The heat transfer between the process chamber
and the regolith is difficult to model accurately. The boundaries between thermal modelling and process
modelling become blurry.
Lunar regolith material properties: The properties of regolith are those of a thermal insulator. Heating regolith
is not trivial.
ISRU process thermal control: The poor thermal conductivity of regolith leads also to challenges in the control
of the heating process.

VII. Summary & Conclusion
In this paper the thermal design challenges, design options, possible implementation and first order thermal
analysis results for two high level ISRU payload missions are presented. The missions were investigated in a
concurrent design approach over the course of several weeks each. In the ISRU-MMO study it was concluded that it
is possible to reach temperatures of up to 1300°C in regolith samples of 0.5 kg with 600 W to 900 W. This was
achieved for heat-up times of less than 13 hours, although optimistic interface temperatures were used. In the ISRUFFC study general feasibility was shown for a concept with not more than 500 W heater power and up to 4 kg of CaCl2
and 0.083 g of regolith. For the ISRU-FFC study heat-up times of less than 5 hours were achieved with the selected
thermal design. The ISRU-FFC thermal analysis also included heat losses to the lander. In both cases the insulation
was composed of a combination of radiative shields, solid insulation and high temperature MLI.
Common thermal control techniques only have limited applicability, as already pointed out in section III-D. In the
following, some heat rejection systems are sketched, from which ISRU processes would benefit. A central aspect is
to vary the heat rejection. Varying the heat rejection allows to remove heat in hot cases whilst reducing the heat losses
in cold cases, such as for example non-operational phases, lunar night time/hibernation or during change of regolith
sample batches. Such a variation in heat rejection can be achieved by a change in emissivity, a change in view factor
to cold or hot sinks, a change in radiator surface temperature, or a combination thereof. Possible methods to reduce
the emissivity are: louvered radiators, radiators with fins against lunar IR, in-plane radiators, thermo-chromatics or
electro-chromatics. The options to alter the view factor to cold or warm sink requires mechanism to change orientation
of the radiator. A change in radiator surface temperature requires either a thermal decoupling from the interior via
some heat switching device or components with thermal diode function, or it requires the interior to survive very low
temperatures, too. Loop heat pipes or pumped fluid loops are options to actively reduce the conductive interface
9
International Conference on Environmental Systems

between heat source (ISRU reactor) and radiator. In case of fluid loops or two phase systems their respective allowable
temperature ranges are relevant. This is because on the lunar surface the temperature range can span over several
hundred degrees over the course of a lunar day, or even locally between sun illuminated and shadowed areas. For
ISRU payloads with short but intense heat dissipation peaks, buffering methods with phase change material (PCM)
can be an option.
In a nutshell, managing the thermal control of high temperature ISRU processes on the surface of the Moon is
challenging. On top of the normal challenges for thermal engineers, there are numerous aspects to be considered in
conjunction with the lander interface, the transit, the challenging lunar surface environment and mostly the extreme
operation mode of an ISRU unit. The requirement of high temperatures combined with usual low power and mass
demands, but also with operational constraints for heat-up and potentially cool down requires also an adapted set of
thermal control means to implement successful ISRU on the surface of the Moon.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the colleagues involved in the ISRU-MMO and ISRU-FFC CDF studies at ESA
ESTEC, in particular A. Cipriano, A. Makaya, A. Borggraefe, B. Lomax, F. Romera, J. Carpenter, L. Gerdes, M.
Landgraf, R. Lindner, T. Strous, T. Haefner, P. Rebeyre, D. de Wilde, A. Meurisse, and M. Conti.

References
1J. Lorenzo Alvarez, H. P. de Koning, D. Fisher, M. Wallum, H. Metselaar, and M. Kretzenbacher, “Towards a definition of

best practices for model based systems engineering in European space agency projects,” 2018 AIAA Sp. Astronaut. Forum Expo.,
no. September, 2018.
2L. Schlüter, A. Cowley, “Review of techniques for In-Situ oxygen extraction on the moon,” Planetary and Space Science, vol.
181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2019.104753, 2020.
3H. Lee et al., “A simulation study on the direct carbothermal reduction of SiO2 for Si metal,” Curr. Appl. Phys., vol. 10, pp.
S218–S221, 2010.
4Gustafson, R. J., White, B. C., and Fidler, M. J., “Oxygen Production via Carbothermal Reduction of Lunar Regolith”,
Warrendale, PA: SAE International, 2009
5H. M. Sargeant et al., “Hydrogen reduction of ilmenite: Towards an in situ resource utilization demonstration on the surface
of the Moon,” Planet. Space Sci., vol. 180, , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2019.104751, 2020.
6C. Schwandt, J. A. Hamilton, D. J. Fray, and I. A. Crawford, “The production of oxygen and metal from lunar regolith,”
Planet. Space Sci., vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 49–56, 2012.
7B. A. Lomax, M. Conti, N. Khan, N.S. Bennett, A. Y. Ganin, M. D. Symes, “Proving the viability of an electrochemical
process for the simultaneous extraction of oxygen and production of metal alloys from lunar regolith”, Planetary and Space Science,
vol. 180, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2019.104748, 2020.
8 Gaier, J. R.; Jaworske, D. A., “Lunar Dust on Heat Rejection System Surfaces: Problems and Prospects”, Space Technology
and applications international forum 2007, New Mexico, Feb. 11-15, NASA/TM—2007-214814, 2007.
9Radioisotope Power Systems to Enable Extended Lunar Science and In-Situ Resource Utilization MissionsRobert Cataldo,
Kris Zacny, and Paul Schmitz, ANS NETS 2018 –Nuclear and Emerging Technologies for SpaceLas Vegas, NV, February 26 –
March 1, 2018, on CD-ROM, American Nuclear Society, LaGrange Park, IL (2018)
10Numerical modelling of the microwave heating behaviour of lunar regolith, Sungwoo Lim*, Mahesh Anand, Planetary and
Space Science, Volume 179, December 2019, 104723
11Technische Universität München, Institute of Astronautics, “LUISE - Lunares In-Situ Experiment – Schlussbericht”,
Förderkennzahl DLR: 50 JR 0902, , https://www.tib.eu/en/search/id/TIBKAT%3A729848760/
12Buck, R., DLR presentation, “Solar tower systems based on particle technology”, SFERA-II Summer School, 2016 ‘Lunar
In-Situ Resource Utilization,
13Sanders, J., Larson, B., Sacksteder, K., Mclemore, C., Johnson, K., “Development and Implementation”,
http://www.frc.ri.cmu.edu/project/lri/scarab/isru.pdf, 2007
14Kleinhenz J. E., Sacksteder, K.R., Nayagam, V., “Lunar Resource Utilization: Development of a Reactor for Volatile
Extraction from Regolith”, AIAA, https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20080006459.pdf, 2007
15K. C. Tripuraneni Kilby, L. Centeno, G. Doughty, S. Muckejohn, and D. J. Fray, “The Electrochemical Production of Oxygen
and Metal via the FFC-Cambridge Process,” pp. 2–3, 2007.
16Gilmore, D.G.,2002-c2003(Ed.).Spacecraft Thermal Control Handbook: vol.1: Fundamental Technologies. Aerospace Press,
1, second ed., ElSegundo,California 90245-4691. isbn:1-884989-11-X (v.1).
17Dallas, T., Diaguila, A. J., Saltsman, J. F., “Design studies on the effects of orientation, lunation, and location on the performance of lunar radiators” National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Cleveland, Ohio, USA, NASA TM X-1846, 1971.
18Racca,
G.D.,1995.Moon surface thermal characteristics for moon orbiting space-craft thermal analysis.
Planet.SpaceSci.43/6,835–842, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(95)00067-F.

10
International Conference on Environmental Systems

19Lawson, S.L., Jakosky, B.M, Park, H.-S., Mellon, M. T., “Brightness temperatures of the lunar surface: Calibration and global
analysis of the Clementine long-wave infrared camera data”, Jour. Geop. Res., vol 105, no. E2, p. 4273-4290, 2000
20Hager, P.B., Klaus, D.M., Walter, U. “Characterizing transient thermal interactions between lunar regolith
and surface spacecraft”, Planetary and Space Science, 92, 101–116, 2014, ttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2014.01.011

11
International Conference on Environmental Systems

