Integrated Modeling and Optimization of
Lunar In-Situ Resource Utilization Systems
Samuel S. Schreiner
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
sschrein@mit.edu

Gerald B. Sanders
Johnson Space Center
Houston, TX 77058

Jeffrey A. Hoffman
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

Kristopher A. Lee
Johnson Space Center
Houston, TX 77058

(lunar soil is ∼44% oxygen by weight) [3]. The production
of this valuable resource outside of Earth’s gravity well can
support lunar surface activities or enable orbital refueling to
drastically reduce mission cost. The 1993 “LUNOX” study
by Johnson Space Center investigated the possible benefits of
producing oxygen on the Moon for early lunar exploration
missions and found an associated reduction in launch vehicle
mass and a 50% reduction program cost.

Abstract—The production of oxygen from lunar regolith, a form
of In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU), is a mission-enabling
technology that can break the supply logistics chain from Earth
to support sustained, affordable space exploration. We present
the development of an integrated ISRU system model to study
and optimize the system mass and power requirements, a
critical development in understanding the proper application
of ISRU systems. The integrated model includes subsystem
models for a Molten Regolith Electrolysis (MRE) reactor, an
excavator, a hopper and feed system, the power system, and
an oxygen liquefaction and storage system. A hybrid geneticalgorithm/gradient-based optimization scheme is implemented
to optimize the ISRU system design across a range of production
levels. Lower oxygen production levels (<1500 kg/yr) are best
managed with a single reactor operating at a traditional temperature of 1900K and a batch time of 2-3 hrs. Larger oxygen
production levels are best met with multiple reactors that each
produce ∼2500 kg/yr, operate at 2200K, and have a batch time
around 1 hr. It is found that an MRE reactor can generate the
entire ISRU system’s mass worth of oxygen in as little as 52 days
at a rate of 7 kg of oxygen annually per kilogram system mass.

Sherwood and Woodcock [2] conducted an economic analysis of producing oxygen on the lunar surface to supply
lander ascent propellant. They determined that lunar ISRU
has great potential to be economically feasible, but “the
sensitivities [of their economic model] are modest, except for
the mass of production hardware” [2]. Thus, it is imperative
to accurately model the mass and performance of ISRU systems to determine economic feasibility. Furthermore, ISRU
system models can provide guidance for both the hardware
development and mission applications of such systems [4].
The oxygen in lunar soil is primarily bound up in oxides and
there are over twenty different oxygen extraction methods
proposed in the literature [1, 5, 6]. In the past decade,
three of these methods have undergone dramatic technology
maturation: Hydrogen Reduction of Ilmenite (HRI), Carbothermal Reduction of Silicates (CRS), and Molten Regolith
Electrolysis (MRE) [7]. Previous research has extensively
modeled HRI and CRS reactors [4, 8, 9, 10, 11] but a
suitably mature model for an MRE reactor has only recently
been developed [12]. MRE is an electrochemical processing
technique that performs direct electrolysis on molten lunar
regolith to produce gaseous oxygen at the anode and liquid
metals at the cathode.

TABLE OF C ONTENTS
1 I NTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2 S YSTEM M ODEL D ESCRIPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
3 ISRU S YSTEM I NTEGRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
4 O PTIMIZATION T ECHNIQUE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5 ISRU S YSTEM O PTIMIZATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
6 C ONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
B IOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

There is a strong impetus to explore the feasibility of an ISRU
system with an MRE reactor, as there are many potential
benefits to such a system. Utilizing MRE may result in
considerable mass savings compared to the other two primary
techniques (HRI and CRS), as it can theoretically extract
all of the oxygen from lunar regolith [13]. MRE does not
require either a gas recycling system or a water electrolyzer,
which may also reduce system mass. Other benefits include
the synergistic production of materials such as iron, silicon,
aluminum and glassy materials. These byproducts of oxygen
production can be used to construct spare parts, buildings and
solar arrays on the lunar surface [14]. Conversely, MRE may
require more power due to the high operating temperature
compared to HRI or CRS. Additionally, MRE is at a lower
technology readiness level (TRL) and thus requires more
technology development.

1. I NTRODUCTION
One of the most significant barriers to space exploration is the
burden of bringing all of the material resources from Earth
required for a mission. To enable sustainable, affordable
space exploration, the reliance on Earth’s resources must be
reduced. In-situ resource utilization (ISRU), or leveraging
extraterrestrial resources to support space missions, can significantly reduce the required launch mass and cost for a
given mission [1, 2].
One avenue for utilizing space resources is producing oxygen on the lunar surface. The production of oxygen from
lunar regolith is a architecture-enabling technology that can
significantly reduce the supply logistics chain from Earth.
Oxygen is a major component of launch vehicle, spacecraft,
and lander masses (∼70% of launch vehicle mass) and at
the same time is one of the most abundant lunar resources

In light of the recent evidence in support of water in the polar
lunar craters [15], there remain many potential benefits to
using MRE on the lunar surface, perhaps even in parallel
with a water extraction scheme. First, there is significant

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 c 2015 IEEE.

1

Molten-Regolith-Core
wcurrent-streamlines-in-redI

uncertainty as to the state and concentration of the water
in lunar craters [15]. A resource prospecting mission is
necessary to ascertain ground truth and is currently planned
to launch in 2019 [16]. MRE may be concurrently developed using composition data from the Apollo lunar samples.
Technical challenges associated with feedstock excavation
on the poles, especially excavation from within permanently
shadowed craters, can also be avoided with the MRE process.

Anode
wO2-I-→-2e--+-1/2O2wgI
Temp-wKI

-

-

Power
Source

This work integrates an MRE reactor model [12] into an
ISRU system model. Previous work in integrated ISRU
system modeling provided a foundation for this analysis, but
did not include a power system, and suitable models for an
MRE reactor and excavation system were not available at
the time [9, 17]. The system model presented in this work
expands upon previous work to encapsulate a more complete
system by including subsystem models of the reactor, power
system, excavation system, oxygen storage and liquefaction
system, as well as a hopper and regolith feed system. By
evaluating the integrated ISRU system, the holistic system
performance may be studied and optimized, rather than just
the reactor subsystem. A hybrid genetic algorithm/gradientbased optimization routine is developed, validated, and exercised to minimize the ISRU system mass over a range of
oxygen production levels.

-

Phase-Boundary
w1500KI

Cathode
wFe I+2e--→-FewlI
wSi4+I+4e--→-SiwlI
2+

Structure
Insulation
Refractory

Figure 1. The anatomy of a Molten Regolith Electrolysis
(MRE) reactor. Also shown are the temperature and current
profiles from a multiphysics simulation that was used to
predict reactor performance and tune reactor design.

be dependent upon lunar location. For example, the higher
iron concentration in the mare regions will result in a lower
average current efficiency [12].

Section 2 provides an overview of the subsystem models.
In Section 3, the integrated system model is presented and
the details of the subsystem connections are presented with
an N2 diagram. Section 4 provides an overview of the
optimization technique implemented on the ISRU system
model. In Section 5, the optimized system design over a range
of oxygen production levels is explored. Section 6 concludes
with some key aspects of the optimized system and provides
recommendations for future work.

The reactor model translates the oxygen production rate into
the required regolith processing rate using the fraction of
oxygen that can be extracted from regolith. Due to the fact
that an MRE reactor can extract oxygen from all oxide species
in lunar regolith, the contribution from each oxide specie
must be summed together:

X
M WO2
moxygen
=
(wi )
(rmol,i )(ef rac,i )
mregolith
M
Woxide,i
i

2. S YSTEM M ODEL D ESCRIPTION
Reactor
Although a variety of reactor models can be integrated into
the system model, this work utilized a Molten Regolith
Electrolysis (MRE) reactor model [12] to better understand
the system-level implications of that processing technique.
As shown in Figure 1, the reactor modeled includes an outer
cylindrical shell with three layers: an outer structural layer,
a middle insulation layer, and an inner refractory layer for
managing the corrosive molten metals produced. The anode
and cathode, composed of a shaft and plate, extend into the
molten region from the top and bottom, respectively. The red
lines depict current streamlines through the inner molten core
of the reactor.

(2)

where wi is the weight percent of oxide i in lunar regolith,
M W is the molar weight (of oxygen or an oxide), rmol,i is
molO2
the number of moles of oxygen per mole of oxide i ( mol
),
oxide
and ef rac,i is the fraction of oxide i that is electrolyzed in
each batch. The fraction of each oxide specie that can be electrolyzed is strongly dependent upon operating temperature,
because the solidification temperature of the melt generally
increases throughout electrolysis. In the MRE reactor model,
the electrolysis process is allowed to progress until the melt
solidification temperature is within 50 K of the operating temperature to allow for a safety margin. Thus, higher operating
temperatures allow the reactor to extract more oxygen per
kilogram regolith, but also results in a higher heat loss to the
environment. This is one tradeoff that is optimized using the
system model.

The reactor model uses electrochemistry to estimate the current and voltage. The current is directly related to the oxygen
production rate:
nF
I = (ṅO2 )
,
(1)
η̄

One key factor in the design of an MRE reactor is the
containment of molten regolith. Molten lunar regolith is
extremely corrosive and cannot be contained for extended
periods of time by traditional crucible materials [13]. A jouleheated, cold-wall reactor, similar to the Hall-Heroult cells
in the aluminum production industry, is an elegant solution
to the challenge of molten regolith containment. In this
concept, the reactor maintains a molten regolith core via the
heat generated by the current passing through the resistive
melt, while the molten region is surrounded by solid regolith
that insulates and protects the side walls of the reactor from
corrosion [19].

where ṅO2 is the desired molar oxygen production rate
(mol/s), n is the number of electrons required per diatomic
oxygen (4), F is Faraday’s constant, and η̄ is the average
current efficiency over an entire batch. The instantaneous
current efficiency depends upon which oxide is currently
being electrolyzed and can range from 30-60% for iron
oxides and is near 100% for melts once the iron oxide has
been depleted [18]. This means that the average efficiency
depends upon the composition of regolith and will therefore
2

To facilitate this complex electrothermodynamic process, the
diameter, electrode separation, and thermal characteristics of
the reactor must be carefully designed. To address this design
challenge, a multiphysics simulation of an MRE reactor was
utilized to create a tradespace of over 40,000 unique reactor
designs. Multivariate nonlinear regression equations were
fit to this tradespace to create a parametric sizing model for
an MRE reactor. The regression equations are used to tune
the reactor diameter, electrode separation, and reactor wall
thermal conductivity to meet the required average current
from Equation 1, the molten mass from Equation 2, and the
operating temperature (set as a reactor model input), while
also ensuring that no molten material touches the reactor
wall [12]. Figure 2 shows the behavior of these three design
variables over a range of oxygen production levels for two
different operating temperatures, as detailed in [12]. Figure 1
shows one feasible design generated using this novel design
methodology.
10

0

8
Reactor
DiameterT(m)

0.5

1

Margin=1.0
Margin=2.0

1.5

2

2.5

3

Acceptable
Diameter
Range

3.5

reactor design. The plots in Figure 2 show how varying
the design margin affects the required diameter, electrode
separation, and wall thermal conductivity.
In this work, the primary reactor design variables that are
optimized include the number of reactors, operating temperature and design margin. Future work can address optimizing
additional parameters, but these three variables were chosen
because they are the primary drivers of MRE reactor design.
YSZ Separator
A Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia separator is included in the system model to separate oxygen from the MRE reactor exhaust
gas. Although the molten electrolysis process produces pure
oxygen by electrolyzing oxides into oxygen gas and liquid
metals, certain species (Na2 O, P2 O5 , K2 O and MgO) will
evaporate after electrolysis and will likely become entrained
in the oxygen flow as contaminants. Additionally, trace gases
such as H2 , N2 , CO2 , and Helium will also be released as
fresh regolith is heated up to a molten state [20].

4

T = 1900K
T = 2200K

Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) is a ceramic material composed of zirconimum dioxide (ZrO2 ) stabilized by the addition of yttrium oxide (Y2 O3 ). YSZ is commonly used as an
electroceramic to measure oxygen content by monitoring the
voltage across conductive platings on each side of the solid
YSZ electrolyte. As shown in Figure 3, to act as a separator,
an active voltage is applied across the electrodes while the
gas flow encounters the cathode. At the cathode, oxygen gas
(O2 ) is ionized to O2− and then transported through the YSZ
electrolyte via the electric field between the plates.

6
4
2
10
Margin=1.0
Margin=2.0

Electrode
SeparationT(cm)

8
6

T = 1900K
T = 2200K
Electrode
Separation
Bounds

4

The power demand of the separator is estimated by determining the required current and voltage. The current is
directly proportional to the amount of oxygen that needs to
be transported through the separator and was calculated using
Equation 1 with a current efficiency of one (assuming no
other species are transported through the separator). To estimate the voltage, the electrical conductivity of YSZ needed to
be modeled. Data on the temperature-dependent conductivity
(σ) of YSZ [21] was fit with the equation:

2
0
T = 1900K
T = 2200K

WallTThermal
ConductivityT(W/m-K)

Margin=1.0
Margin=2.0

103

100
10-2

10-5

0

0.5

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
ReactorTCurrentT(kA) ~ OxygenTProductionTLevel

3.5

4

ln(σ(T )) = a ∗ exp(b ∗ T ) [S/cm]

Figure 2. The required reactor diameter, electrode
separation, and wall thermal conductivity (bottom) plotted
over a range of reactor currents. Note: The molten mass in
the reactor is also scaled up with current to make the x-axis
a surrogate for oxygen production level.

(3)

where the fit coefficients are a = −23.4 ± 4.8 and b =
−0.00259 ± 0.0003 and the temperature, T , is in Kelvin. The
temperature dependence in the YSZ conductivity couples the
separator model and the reactor model: a higher operating
temperature in the reactor results in a higher electrical conductivity of the YSZ separator which decreases the power
required for the separator. For simplicity, temperature of
the YSZ was taken to be 75% of the reactor operating
temperature. This was intended as a preliminary estimate
to couple reactor temperature and YSZ temperature, while
also accounting for some heat loss between the reactor and
separator. Future work can generate a more accurate model
of the expected temperature at the separator as a function
of reactor temperature. The electrical conductivity was then
used to calculate the resistance of the YSZ separator (RY SZ ):

As detailed in [12], the reactor design methodology includes a
design variable called the “design margin”, which describes
the flexibility in the reactor design. There is a maximum
reactor diameter that satisfies the operating temperature and a
minimum diameter that satisfies the required mass of molten
regolith in the reactor. These two bounds on reactor diameter
can be varied by changing wall thermal conductivity, and
the design margin describes the ratio of these two diameter
bounds. A design margin of 1.0 results in the minimum and
maximum diameter bounds being equal, while a margin of
2.0 results in a maximum diameter bound that is twice the
minimum. Having a range of acceptable reactor diameters
results in an acceptable range of electrode separations, which
enables a variable electrode separation during operation to
control operating voltage and heat production. Design margin
can be considered as a surrogate for traversing the design
space between the optimality and flexibility of an MRE

RY SZ =

∆x
,
σ(T ) S

(4)

where ∆x is the thickness of the YSZ separator (assumed to
be 0.5 cm), σ(T ) is the YSZ electrical conductivity calculated
from Equation 3, and S is the required cross-sectional area of
3

AnodegPlating

O2gGas

An excavator speed of 0.5 m/s and a plant distance of 100 m
are used to properly size themobility platform for the excavator. Information on the excavator operating duty cycle
based on the power system charge/recharge cycle is also
incorporated into the model. The excavator model utilizes
all of this information to generate an excavator design that
can meet the regolith delivery requirements from the reactor
while withstanding the excavation forces and regolith load
requirements.

YSZgFilter
Driving
Powerg
Source

O2-

CathodegPlating

Hopper and Feed System
The main driver in the hopper model is the buffer capacity, or
the amount of regolith the hopper had to hold in terms of days
of reactor operation. A buffer capacity of 2 days was chosen
to ensure that the hopper could hold enough regolith for
continual reactor operation if the excavator needed repairs.
Furthermore, a buffer capacity of 2 days effectively decouples
the excavation system scheduling from reactor batch mode
operation (i.e. although the reactor may operate on a 1 hour
batch time, the excavator can deliver regolith with a lower
frequency).

Gaseous
O2,gNa,gK,gP,getc.g
fromgReactor

Figure 3. A diagram of the proposed YSZ schematic for use
with the Molten Regolith Electrolysis reactor.

The feed system model calculates the mass and power of the
system required to insert fresh regolith from the hopper into
the reactor. An auger was chosen for this design iteration,
but other methods, such as a pneumatic feed system, can be
modeled in the future. The feed system model sizes an auger
that extends from the reactor through a cylindrical sleeve and
into the hopper. Using estimates of the cohesion, internal
and external friction angles, and soil-tool adhesion values for
lunar regolith, the feed system model estimates the expected
torque on the auger and the resultant power consumption. The
number of feed systems is set equal to the number of reactors,
as each reactor will likely require its own feed system. The
sleeve and auger are made out of Hastelloy C-276, due to the
interface with the high-temperature reactor.

the YSZ separator calculated as:
S=

IY SZ
,
j

(5)

where IY SZ is the required current through the YSZ separator and j, the limiting current density, was taken to be
0.4 A/cm2 [22]. The power of the YSZ ceramic was estimated
using the current and resistance (I2 R). The dimensions of
the separator and a 304 Stainless Steel casing are used to
calculate the YSZ separator mass.
It should be noted that the YSZ separator model is a simplified version with the intention of determining the power
needed for oxygen separation with only first-order estimates
of mass and volume. It is believed that the power requirement
of the YSZ separator will play a much more significant role
than its mass in the ISRU system optimization. YSZ oxygen separators are commonly composed of multiple packed
tubes or stacked wafers, which could reduce the mass and
volume estimates, but not significantly change the power
requirement, compared to this simplified YSZ model. A more
realistic mass model will be created in a future iteration.

One assumption built into the feed system model is that a
5 cm diameter auger rotating at 5 rpm would be adequate to
insert a full batch of regolith in the feed time set as an input
in the reactor model. That is, for larger amounts of regolith
per batch, the feed system was not parametrically sized up,
due to limitations in the model design. Future work can
expand the feed system model to dynamically size the radius
and rotational rate of the auger system to meet the required
regolith mass flowrate.
Oxygen Liquefaction and Storage
The oxygen liquefaction and storage system utilizes oxygen
production data from the reactor to size both the liquefaction
and storage systems. The liquefaction system determines
the mass and power of the system required to liquefy the
oxygen coming from the reactor, as well as the cooling power
required to re-liquefy oxygen that has boiled off in the storage
system.

Excavator
The excavator system, developed at the Glenn Research Center [23], predicts the mass of a mobile excavation platform
sized to deliver the regolith throughput requirement to the
reactor. A force module utilizes the Balovnev force equations
to generate estimates of the force and torque involved in excavating lunar regolith. A hole depth of 25 cm with cut depths
of 2.5 cm was used to size a front-end loader in this system
model. The excavation force estimates are used to size the
excavation actuators using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
actuators and controllers from Danaher2 . The force module
also determines the vehicle reaction and traction forces. A
mass module conducts a structural analysis to ensure that the
excavator chassis can support the regolith weight and that
the digging mechanism can support the expected excavation
stresses. The locomotion motors are modeled after the Maxon
motors used on the Mars Exploration Rover [24].

For the storage system, a capacity of 6 months was chosen
to allow for sufficient propellant production to support two
refueling missions per year. The number of layers of MLI can
be chosen to balance heat loss with system mass. Based off
of a user material selection, the storage system is sized such
that the yield stress is less than the hoop stress with a factor
of safety of 2. The tank size and number of layers of MLI
directly impact the boiloff rate due to expected heat leakage
into the tank.

2 http://www.danahermotion.com

4

is one avenue for reducing reactor mass. But this reduction
in reactor mass comes at the cost of an increase in reactor
power due to the increase in total down time between batches
which reduces total operational time. The integrated model
enables a more complete study of the optimal batch time, as
one example, by including the mass of both the power and
reactor subsystems.

Power System
The power subsystem is parametrically sized from the total
power requirement summed over all of the other subsystems,
as shown in Figure 4. A number of options are available in
the power model, including solar arrays without energy storage (day-only operation), solar arrays with fuel-cell energy
storage to enable lunar night operation, a Stirling radioisotope
generator, and a fission surface power system. To reduce the
design tradespace, this study restricted the power system to
be solar cells that provide power to the ISRU system for dayonly operation. From a prior NASA study, using this type
of power system in the Shackleton crater rim area resulted
in an approximate duty cycle of at least 0.7 (>70% of the
year with continuous uninterrupted solar power), due to the
longer day duration near the lunar poles. Other locations
have a corresponding duty cycle of 0.5. The specific mass
of the solar array power system without energy storage was
taken to be 20 kg/kWe [25]. Future work can evaluate the
effectiveness of other power systems in the context of a lunar
ISRU system.

Another important design variable to optimize is the reactor
operating temperature. Higher operating temperatures intuitively result in more radiative heat loss and increase the
heating power per kilogram regolith. Conversely, higher
temperatures decrease the regolith throughput requirement
by increasing the amount of oxygen extracted per kilogram
regolith. From an electrochemical point of view, higher
temperatures result in a more endothermic reaction. The
integrated ISRU system model provides a framework to study
the optimal operating temperature.
Figure 4 depicts an N2 diagram of the ISRU system. The primary subsystem couplings are shown, with some secondary
connections left out for clarity. It is evident that the reactor,
described in detail in [12], is a strong driver of many other
system designs, as one would expect. It is a large driver of
the power requirement and also sets the regolith processing
requirement which directly affects the excavator, hopper and
feed systems. The power requirement from each subsystem
is summed together and used to size the power system. After
the power system is sized, the mass of all of the subsystems,
including the power system, are summed together to generate
an estimate of the total ISRU system mass.

3. ISRU S YSTEM I NTEGRATION
The subsystem models described in the preceding section are
integrated together into a holistic system model. By linking
the subsystems (reactor, excavator, power, etc.) together into
a self-consistent model, the entire mass and power of an ISRU
system can be estimated. The self-consistency of the model
allows the tradeoffs between subsystem designs to be studied.
For instance, shortening the batch time of an MRE reactor

Optimiziation
Variables

=

{

•lOperatinglTemperature
•lBatchlTime
•lOperatinglMargin
•lflReactors

Constant
Missiong
Inputs

{

OxygenlProductionlRate

= LunarlLocation
PowerlSource/availability

Reactorbs=g

Regolithl
Requirement
Excavator

Regolithl
Requirement
flof
Reactors

Oxygen
Production
Rate
OxygenlGas
Temperature

Powerl
Req.

Hopper/FeedgSys.

O2gLiq.gzgStorageg

Totalg
System
Power
PowergSystem

Massl&
Volume

Totalg
System
Massgz
Volume

Figure 4. An N2 diagram of the ISRU system model within the optimization routine, showing how the subsystems are
interconnected to generate a self-consistent estimate of system mass, which is then optimized.

5

4. O PTIMIZATION T ECHNIQUE

1400

A genetic algorithm (GA) optimization routine was used
with the holistic system model to optimize the ISRU system
design by varying subsystem design variables. A genetic
algorithm method was implemented, rather than traditional
gradient-based optimization techniques, due to the mixedinteger nature of the system: although some parameters were
continuous, such as operating temperature, the majority of
parameters were discrete, such as number of reactors or
excavators and material selections. A genetic algorithm is
a heuristic search method that attempts to mimic natural
selection by generating a population of candidate designs in
what is called a generation. The fitness (or goodness) of
each generation is evaluated and the characteristics of the
top-performing candidates are recombined/mutated to form
the subsequent generation. The genetic solver terminates
when the fitness function does not significantly change over a
number of generations.

Best penalty value
Mean penalty value

ISRU System Mass (kg)

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0

1

2

3

4

5
6
Generation

7

8

9

10

Figure 5. A sample output from the genetic algorithm
optimizer used on the ISRU system model, where the
penalty value is the mass of the ISRU system (kg). The
downwards trend in the blue data shows the effectiveness of
the “natural selection” of better performing candidates from
generation to generation.

A sample output from the genetic algorithm solver is shown
in Figure 5. The “Mean penalty value” markers depict the
mean system mass within the entire population of systems
designs in a given generation. The “Best penalty value”
shows the lowest mass ISRU system in a given generation.

duction levels. The most significant mass drivers are the
oxygen liquefaction/storage system and power system, which
comprise 26% and 54% of the system mass at a production
level of 10,000 kg/yr, respectively. As mentioned in the
model description, the oxygen storage system was designed
to hold 6 months of oxygen production at any given time,
and this requirement may be relaxed depending upon the
mission needs. The reactor and YSZ separator compose
approximately 6% of the entire ISRU system mass at an
oxygen production level of 10,000 kg/year. The total system
mass curve was fit with the following power-law curve:

Although GA is a suitable technique for optimization over
discrete variables, it is not particularly well suited to optimized a large number of continuous parameters. To enable a
more efficient optimization, a gradient-based optimizer was
implemented that used the final GA solution as a starting
point with the integer variables fixed. The ISRU system
model is nonlinear and contains no analytical gradient, so the
solver used finite difference approximations for the gradient.
In this manner, the GA optimizer was used to find the general
global minimum region while avoiding local minimums, and
the gradient-based optimizer was used to hone in on the true
minimum.

M = 0.52 ∗ N 0.86 ,

Many of the subsystem models contained error flags that
identified infeasible reactor designs, vehicle slippage, and a
number of other system model errors. A set of soft constraints
were implemented by penalizing the mass of systems with
error flags by a factor of 5. In this manner the hybrid optimization scheme selectively removed system designs with
error flags due to the system mass penalty.

(6)

where M is the ISRU system mass and N is the annual
oxygen production level. The fact that the power coefficient
is less than one implies that the ISRU system exhibits an
economy of scale. That is, the ISRU system produces higher
quantities of oxygen more efficiently.
A number of interesting trends exist in the optimized system
parameters shown in the lower plots of Figure 6. The optimal
number of reactors (Plot a in Figure 6) behaves as one
would expect. At low production levels a single reactor is
preferable, but as production level increases, more reactors
are selected to meet the production demand. This indicates
that there is an maximum optimal oxygen production for a
single reactor. That is, for MRE, there is an optimal reactor
design for somewhere near 2500 kg/yr and increasing oxygen
production rate significantly beyond this threshold can best
be met by increasing the number of reactors rather than by
tuning reactor design.

5. ISRU S YSTEM O PTIMIZATION
Tradespace Optimization
This study looked at optimizing the batch time, number
of reactors, MRE reactor operating temperature, and MRE
design margin (described in Section 2) to minimize the integrated ISRU system mass. Figure 6 shows the the growth
of the ISRU system mass and power over a range of oxygen
production levels in the top two plots. The remaining graphs
(with labels) depict the optimized system design tradespace,
including the number of reactors (a), operating temperature
(b), reactor diameter (c), molten mass per batch (d), average
reactor current (e), operating voltage (f), batch time (g) and
the MRE design margin (h). It should be emphasized that the
operating current and molten mass per batch are both for a
single reactor, not for the combined reactors when multiple
are present.

The optimal operating temperature (Plot b in Figure 6) also
displays some interesting behavior. In the optimization
routine, operating temperature was given hard bounds between 1873 k and 2200 K (illustrated by the black dotted
lines). Below 1873 K, the reactor comes dangerous close
to the solidification temperature of iron and runs the risk
of producing solid iron and “freezing” the reactor. Above
2200 K, the MRE model was not sufficiently tested to produce
reliable results. The optimal operating temperature begins
around 1900 K at 500 kg/yr, and rises to the 2200 K ceiling

The top left plot in Figure 6 examines the growth in the
ISRU system mass breakdown over a range of oxygen pro6

1500

35
Reactor

Chemical Electrolysis (∆G)

YSZ Separator

Regolith Heating + Phase Change

30

ISRU System Power (kW)

ISRU System Mass (kg)

Excavator
Feed System
Hopper

1000

Power System
Liquefaction & Storage

500

Radiative Heat Loss
Endothermic Makeup (T∆S)
YSZ Separator

25

Feed System
Liquefaction & Storage

20

15

10

Operating Temperature (K)

5

0

# Reactors

a
4

2

b

2200
2100
2000
1900
1800

Molten Mass (kg)

0.8

c

0.6

0.4

1.85

d

1.8
1.75
1.7
1.65

Avg Voltage (V)

e
2000

1000

0

f

6

4

2

0

g

h

3

MRE Margin

Batch Time (hr)

Single Reactor Current (A)

Reactor Diam (m)

0

0

2

1

0

1.0125

1

0.9875

0.975
1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000 10000

1000

Annual Oxygen Production (kg/yr)

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000 10000

Annual Oxygen Production (kg/yr)

Figure 6. (Top) The system mass and power breakdowns over a range of oxygen production levels. The optimized variables
in the system design, with an emphasis on the reactor design that results from the optimized holistic ISRU system.

7

for higher production levels. A small decrease in operating
temperature occurs when the second reactor is added to the
system to meet the production level of 3000 kg/year. The
rise to higher temperatures is likely due to the fact that
electrolyzing at higher temperatures allows more oxygen to
be extracted per kilogram regolith, which reduces regolith
throughput requirements and reactor size [12]. Prior to this
analysis, it was unclear whether or not these benefits would
be outweighed by the increased heat loss, increased regolith
heating requirement (per kilogram regolith), and resultant
power system increase. The integrated system model showed
that operating temperatures higher than the traditional 1873 K
do indeed result in a lower total system mass at high production levels.

worth noting that margin increases away from 1.0 prior to
the addition of another reactor to the system, indicating that
the reactor design is being stretched away from the optimal
reactor production level. The MRE margin always returns to
a value of 1.0 at higher production levels with the addition of
another reactor.
The top right plot in Figure 6 examines the the growth in
the ISRU system power breakdown in more detail. The
“Chemical Electrolysis (∆G)” section represents the power
required to break the chemical bonds in the oxides in lunar
regolith. The “Regolith Heating + Phase Change” section
represents the power required to heat the regolith up from
the ambient temperature of ∼400K to the operating temperature (∼2000K), including the latent heat of melting in the
phase change. “Radiative Heat Loss” is predicted by the
regression equations discussed in Section 2. The “Endothermic Makeup” slice depicts the amount of power required
to maintain thermal equilibrium throughout the endothermic
electrolysis reaction. “YSZ Separator”, “Feed System”, and
“Liquefaction and Storage” power demands are discussed in
Section 2.

The reactor diameter (plot c) appears to grow with oxygen
production level, and then decreases each time the number
of reactors increases. This shows that at certain oxygen
production levels, in order to increase production it is optimal to incorporate an additional reactor rather than increase
reactor size. The reactor diameter appears to have a minimum
of approximately 0.45 m and does not grow larger than
0.8 m for the oxygen production levels studied in this work
(<10,000 kg/yr).

Optimization Method Comparison
Figure 7 shows the mass the ISRU system optimized by the
genetic-algorithm (GA) routine and by the hybrid method
described in Section 4. As one would expect, the hybrid
method results in system masses that are the same or lower
compared to those found using the GA routine. On average, the ISRU system mass from the hybrid optimizer was
11.4 kg less than the GA method alone. The maximum mass
difference between the two optimized systems was 45.9 kg.
Although not shown, similar trends were observed in the
ISRU system power. The hybrid-optimized system had a
power consumption of 0.29 kW less, on average. The largest
difference observed was when the hybrid optimized system
had a power consumption of 1.0 kW less than the system
generated by the GA optimization alone.

The molten mass per batch (plot d) appears to have an optimal
value of around 1.87 kg/batch. Deviations from the optimal
value occur only at low production levels. Future work will
have to further analyze the source of this optimal value.
The current per reactor (plot e) intuitively increases with oxygen production level, and then decreases each time the number of reactors increases. It would appear that a maximum
current of around 2000 A per reactor is optimal. Above this
limit the reactor must grow exponentially to accommodate
the additional heat load. Note that the current line is roughly
linear with a slope that is inversely proportional to the number
of reactors. Deviations from linearity occur due to the change
in current efficiency with operating temperature, as detailed
in [12].
The average reactor voltage (plot f ) decreases asymptotically
from a value of approximately 6 volts at a production level
of 500 kg/yr to around 3.25 volts at higher production levels.
This is a result of increased current per reactor as shown in
plot e. As the current in each reactor increases, the voltage
can decrease while still generating enough heat to maintain
the molten core. Each time a reactor is added to the system,
we observe a slight increase in voltage which then returns
towards the asymptote.

1800

ISRU System Mass (kg)

1600

The optimal batch time (plot g) appears to decrease in a
piecewise asymptotic manner from approximately 3.5 hours
at a production level of 500 kg/yr to slightly more than 1 hour
at higher production levels. A small increase in batch time
occurs when the number of reactors increases.

Genetic Alg. Optimizer
Hybrid Optimizer

1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200

The MRE reactor design margin (plot h in Figure 6) also
exhibits interesting behavior. It stays reasonably close to 1.0
across all oxygen production levels, with the most significant
deviation of less than 1.01 occurring at 2500 kg/yr. A margin
of close to 1.0 is certainly intuitive, as the margin describes
the tradeoff between minimal power consumption (margin=1)
and increased reactor design flexibility (margin>1). Although margin was bounded between 1.0 and 10.0 in the
optimization, the GA-optimizer would often select optimal
margin values between 1.0 and 2.0 and the gradient-optimizer
would then find optimal values within 1% of 1.0. It is

0

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Annual Oxygen Production (kg/year)

Figure 7. The mass of the optimized ISRU system across a
range of production levels. The system designs generated by
the hybrid optimization scheme are compared to those
generated by the genetic algorithm alone.

8

320

6.5

300

6

280

5.5

260

5

240

4.5

220

4

200

3.5

180

3
0

2000
4000
6000
8000
Annual Oxygen Production (kg/year)

The trends in the ISRU system mass (shown in Figure 6) exhibited an economy of scale, indicating that higher production
levels can be met more efficiently. At a production level of
10,000 kg/year, the ISRU system can produce 7 kg of oxygen
annually per kilogram system mass. This translates to the
ISRU system being able to produce the entire system mass in
oxygen in 52 days at a production level of 10,000 kg/year. At
low production levels (∼500 kg/yr), it would take approximately 120 days. If the Molten Regolith Electrolysis process
is also leveraged to produce molten metals for manufacturing,
the number of days till mass payoff would be significantly
reduced.

(kg O2/yr)/(kW plant power)

(kg O2/yr)/(kg plant mass)

7

The power system plays the largest role in system mass, comprising 54% of the holistic system mass. The power system
mass could be reduced by better limiting heat loss from the
reactor, which is a primary driver of total system power.
Although MRE reactors need to lose a certain amount of heat
through the side walls to enable a molten core surrounded by
solid regolith, the top and bottom of the reactor could possibly
be better insulated to reduce heat loss.

160
10000

Figure 8. The oxygen production level normalized by
holistic ISRU system mass (blue) and holistic ISRU system
power (green).

The oxygen liquefaction and storage system was also a major
mass driver, comprising 26% of the holistic system mass. The
system was sized to hold 6 months of oxygen production,
which results in significant amount of stored oxygen at higher
production levels. The 6 month storage requirement may not
be necessary at higher production levels, as oxygen may also
be used more frequently.

ISRU System Utility
With any ISRU system, it is important to compare the utility
of the system to a baseline concept of simply bringing along
the resources from Earth. Figure 8 shows the annual oxygen
production normalized by the mass (blue) and power (green)
of the complete ISRU plant, which are measures of the plant
efficiency. It is clear that at higher production levels an
MRE-based ISRU system is able to produce more oxygen
per unit plant mass and power. The oxygen production level
normalized by system mass increases with production level,
indicating that the ISRU system utilizing an MRE reactor can
meet higher production levels more efficiently. Within the
production levels studied in this work, the maximum efficiency of ∼7 kg oxygen per kilogram ISRU system mass was
observed at the maximum production level of 10,000 kg/year.

The optimization confirmed that an MRE reactor design
margin close to 1.0 is indeed optimal for minimizing the
combination of reactor mass and power system mass. This
was previously somewhat uncertain [12], as a margin of 1.0
corresponds to the lowest reactor power consumption, but at
the cost of a larger reactor design. Future designs may use a
design margin of slightly higher than 1.0 to incorporate some
flexibility in the electrode separation during operation.
It was shown that operating temperatures above the traditional paradigm of ∼1900 K are optimal for oxygen production levels above 500 kg/yr. Initially, it was unclear
whether or not the benefits of a higher operating temperature would outweigh the drawbacks. Operating at a higher
temperature allows the reactor to extract more oxygen per
kilogram regolith and marginally decreases the total energy
required for the chemical reactor (∆H), while the drawbacks
include increased heat loss and regolith heating power per
kilogram regolith. The integrated model optimization results
showed that operating temperatures closer to 2200 K result in
a smaller holistic system mass.

To further understand the utility of an ISRU system, the number of days until the plant produces its mass in oxygen was
also calculated. Using the data in Figure 8, it was determined
that at an oxygen production level of 10,000 kg/year, it takes
around 52 days for the ISRU system to “pay off” and produce
its mass in oxygen. At a production level of 500 kg/yr, it
will take 120 days to “pay off”. It should be noted that
this analysis does not include economic considerations, future
work will investigate the price of oxygen produced and the
cost of developing and emplacing the ISRU system. For this
analysis, examining the mass “pay off” point provides a firstorder surrogate for determining the tipping point in system
utility.

The power breakdown shown in the top right of Figure 6 can
also inform future designs. The bottom three sections in the
graph (chemical and regolith heat up power) are somewhat
immutable, but the radiative heat loss may be reduced via
more complex insulation topologies. One elegant solution
would be to place new regolith on the sides of the reactor
prior to insertion, such that the heat that exits through the
sides of the reactor goes directly into preheating the regolith.
In this way, some portion of the “Radiative Heat Loss” power
slice may go towards “Regolith Heating”, thus reducing total
power demand. Further power reduction may be achieved by
recycling the heat generated by the oxygen liquefaction and
storage system to preheat the regolith or supply some portion
of the endothermic makeup requirement.

6. C ONCLUSIONS
Optimal System Design
This paper presents estimates of the mass and power of an
optimized ISRU system to extract oxygen from lunar regolith.
To accomplish this, a Molten Regolith Electrolysis reactor
model is integrated with models for a power system, excavator, hopper, regolith feed system, and oxygen liquefaction
and storage systems. This integrated model is leveraged
in a hybrid genetic-algorithm/gradient-based optimization
scheme to generate optimized system performance and design
estimates across a range of oxygen production levels.
9

Technical Research and Development Project Job, no.
90634-002, 1990. 1
[7] G. B. Sanders and W. E. Larson, “Progress made in
lunar in situ resource utilization under nasas exploration technology and development program,” Journal
of Aerospace Engineering, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 5–17,
2012. 1, 10
[8] C. J. Steffen, J. E. Freeh, D. L. Linne, E. W. Faykus,
C. A. Gallo, and R. D. Green, “System modeling of
lunar oxygen production: Mass and power requirements,” in Proceedings of Space Nuclear Conference
2007, 2007. 1
[9] A. Chepko, “Technology selection and architecture
optimization of in-situ resource utilization systems,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009. 1, 2
[10] U. Hegde, R. Balasubramaniam, and S. Gokoglu,
“Heating-rate-coupled model for hydrogen reduction
of,” AIAA Proceedings, 2010. 1
[11] R. Balasubramaniam, S. Gokoglu, and U. Hegde, “The
reduction of lunar regolith by carbothermal processing
using methane,” International Journal of Mineral Processing, vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 54–61, 2010. 1
[12] S. S. Schreiner, L. Sibille, J. A. Dominguez, and A. H.
Sirk, “A molten regolith electrolysis model for lunar
in-situ resource utilization,” AIAA SciTech 2015: 8th
Symposium on Space Resource Utilization, 2015. 1, 2,
3, 5, 8, 9
[13] A. H. Sirk, D. R. Sadoway, and L. Sibille, “Direct
electrolysis of molten lunar regolith for the production
of oxygen and metals on the moon,” ECS Transactions,
vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 367–373, 2010. 1, 2
[14] P. Curreri, E. Ethridge, S. Hudson, T. Miller, R. Grugel,
S. Sen, and D. Sadoway, “Process demonstration for
lunar in situ resource utilizationmolten oxide electrolysis,” NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. MSFC Independent Research and Development Project, no. 5-81,
2006. 1
[15] A. Colaprete, P. Schultz, J. Heldmann, D. Wooden,
M. Shirley, K. Ennico, B. Hermalyn, W. Marshall,
A. Ricco, R. C. Elphic et al., “Detection of water in the
lcross ejecta plume,” Science, vol. 330, no. 6003, pp.
463–468, 2010. 1, 2
[16] D. Andrews, A. Colaprete, J. Quinn, D. Chavers, and
M. Picard, “Introducing the resource prospector (rp)
mission,” in AIAA Space 2014 Conference, 2014. 2
[17] A. Chepko, O. de Weck, D. Linne, E. SantiagoMaldonado, and W. Crossley, “Architecture modeling
of in-situ oxygen production and its impacts on lunar
campaigns,” in AIAA SPACE 2008 Conference & Exposition, 2008. 2
[18] L. Sibille, D. Sadoway, P. Tripathy, E. Standish, A. Sirk,
O. Melendez, and D. Stefanescu, “Performance testing
of molten regolith electrolysis with transfer of molten
material for the production of oxygen and metals on
the moon,” AIAA: 3rd Symposium on Space Resource
Utilization, 2010. 2
[19] L. Sibille and J. A. Dominguez, “Joule-heated molten
regolith electrolysis reactor concepts for oxygen and
metals production on the moon and mars,” 50th AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, 2012. 2, 10
[20] D. A. O’Handley, E. E. Rice, and R. J. Gustafson, “Isru
support for a self-sustaining lunar colony (sslc),” 39th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, January
2001. 3
[21] S. Heiroth, T. Lippert, A. Wokaun et al., “Microstructure and electrical conductivity of ysz thin films pre-

Future Work
There are a number of items that can be addressed in future
work. The excavator system model currently does not produce an estimate of the energy consumed by the excavator,
which would be an important addition to future models. Since
the model’s creation, newer excavation theory and models
have also been developed [7, 26, 27], which can be integrated
into the excavation model.
As mentioned in Section 2, the auger model is not yet
parametrically sized to meet a given regolith insertion mass
and time. Future work can dynamically size the radius and
rotation rate of the auger to meet a specified insertion time
that is compatible with the reactor model. This subsystem
coupling would better inform an optimal reactor fill time and
batch time.
One function that was not modeled in this work was the
extraction of molten metals from the Molten Regolith Electrolysis reactor. Although a molten metal withdrawal system
has been developed [19], the mass of the system and the
interface between the withdrawal system and the reactor
are uncertain. Future work can investigate incorporating a
molten metal withdrawal model into the ISRU system model.
By incorporating a withdrawal system model, future work
will also examine the impact of MRE operating temperature
with respect to metal and silicon product availability and
production rate.
Future design iterations can also focus on including a spare
parts analysis to more accurately determine the holistic mass
of a less-than-ideal ISRU system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would also like to thank Diane Linne, Juan
Agui, Chris Gallo, and Greg Galloway for providing some
of the subsystem models for the lunar ISRU system. We
also thank Jesus Dominguez for his guidance on the theory
behind the YSZ separator model and for providing some of
the subsystem models. The authors thank Ariane Chepko
for her advice concerning ISRU system model integration
and Laurent Sibille for his guidance on the system-level
considerations of Molten Regolith Electrolysis. This work
was supported by a NASA Space Technology Research Fellowship (NASA Grant #NNX13AL76H).

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

L. A. Taylor and W. D. Carrier III, “Oxygen production
on the moon: An overview and evaluation,” Resources
of near earth space, p. 69, 1993. 1
B. Sherwood and G. R. Woodcock, “Cost and benefits
of lunar oxygen: Economics, engineering, and operations,” 1993. 1
V. Badescu, Moon: Prospective Energy and Material
Resources. Springer, 2012. 1
D. L. Linne, “Employing isru models to improve hardware design,” in Proc., 48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New Horizons Forum and
Aerospace Exposition, 2010. 1
E. Christiansen, C. H. Simonds, and K. Fairchild,
“Conceptual design of a lunar oxygen pilot plant,” LPI
Contributions, vol. 652, p. 52, 1988. 1
B. Altenberg, “Processing lunar in-situ resources,”
10

Gerald Sanders received his B.S. degree in Aerospace Engineering from the
University of Cincinnati in 1987. He
currently works in the Propulsion and
Power Division at the NASA Johnson
Space Center, in Houston Texas. Mr.
Sanders has worked in the area of InSitu Resource Utilization (ISRU) for
over 19 years, and currently serves as
ISRU Chief Engineer.

pared by pulsed laser deposition,” Applied Physics A,
vol. 93, no. 3, pp. 639–643, 2008. 3
[22] J. Wang, Z. Lü, X. Huang, K. Chen, N. Ai, J. Hu,
and W. Su, “Ysz films fabricated by a spin smoothing
technique and its application in solid oxide fuel cell,”
Journal of power sources, vol. 163, no. 2, pp. 957–959,
2007. 4
[23] C. A. Gallo, R. A. Wilkinson, R. P. Mueller, J. Schuler,
and A. Nick, “Comparison of isru excavation system
model blade force methodology and experimental results,” American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 2009. 4
[24] R. Lindemann and C. Voorhees, “Mars exploration
rover mobility assembly design, test and performance,”
in 2005 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, vol. 1, Oct 2005, pp. 450–455
Vol. 1. 4
[25] A. J. Hanford, “Advanced life support baseline values
and assumptions document,” 2006. 5
[26] K. Zacny, R. Mueller, G. Galloway, J. Craft, G. Mungas,
M. Hedlund, and P. Fink, “Novel approaches to drilling
and excavation on the moon,” in AIAA SPACE Conference & Exposition, 2009, pp. 6431–6443. 10
[27] K. Zacny, P. Chu, G. Paulsen, J. Spring, M. Hedlund,
J. Craft, P. van Susante, R. Mueller, G. Galloway, and
J. Mantovani10, “Parametric optimization and prediction software for excavation and prospecting tasks,”
2013. 10

Kristopher A. Lee received his B.S.
degree in Mechanical Engineering in
1995 and a M.S. degree in Electrical
Engineering from Texas A&M Universtiy in 1998. He currently works in the
Propulsion and Power Division at the
NASA Johnson Space Center where he
designs and develops embedded control
and monitoring applications for hardware in support of In-Situ Resource Utilization research and development.

B IOGRAPHY [

Samuel S. Schreiner is a NASA Space
Technology Research Fellow in the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT and is pursuing a Masters in
Aerospace Engineering with a focus on
space systems engineering. He received
a Bachelors of Aerospace Engineering
and Mechanics from the University of
Minnesota (summa cum laude) in 2013.
He conducts research at MIT modeling
In-Situ Resource Utilization technology to produce oxygen
and other resources from planetary regolith.

Dr. Jeffrey Hoffman is a professor in
MITs Aeronautics and Astronautics Department. He received a BA in Astronomy (summa cum laude) from Amherst
College (1966); a PhD in Astrophysics
from Harvard University (1971); and
an MSc in Materials Science from Rice
University (1988). As a NASA astronaut
(1978-1997) Dr. Hoffman made five
space flights, becoming the first astronaut to log 1000 hours of flight time aboard the Space Shuttle.
His primary research interests are in improving the technology of space suits and designing innovative space systems
for human and robotic space exploration. Dr. Hoffman is
director of the Massachusetts Space Grant Consortium. In
2007, Dr. Hoffman was elected to the US Astronaut Hall of
Fame.
11

